Animal nutrition.0000	bytes = `` 36201 '' > Animal nutrition focuses on the dietary needs of domesticated animals , primarily those in agriculture and food production .
Animal nutrition.0001	Introduction to animal nutrition There are seven major classes of nutrients : carbohydrates , fats , fiber , minerals , protein , vitamin , and water .
Animal nutrition.0002	These nutrient classes can be categorized as either macronutrients -LRB- needed in relatively large amounts -RRB- or micronutrients -LRB- needed in smaller quantities -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0003	The macronutrients are carbohydrates , fats , fiber , proteins , and water .
Animal nutrition.0004	The micronutrients are minerals and vitamins .
Animal nutrition.0005	The macronutrients -LRB- excluding fiber and water -RRB- provide structural material -LRB- amino acids from which proteins are built , and lipids from which cell membranes and some signaling molecules are built -RRB- and energy .
Animal nutrition.0006	Some of the structural material can be used to generate energy internally , and in either case it is measured in joules or calories -LRB- sometimes called `` kilocalories '' and on other rare occasions written with a capital C to distinguish them from little ` c ' calories -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0007	Carbohydrates and proteins provide 17 kJ approximately -LRB- 4 kcal -RRB- of energy per gram , while fats provide 37 kJ -LRB- 9 kcal -RRB- per gram. , though the net energy from either depends on such factors as absorption and digestive effort , which vary substantially from instance to instance .
Animal nutrition.0008	Vitamins , minerals , fiber , and water do not provide energy , but are required for other reasons .
Animal nutrition.0009	A third class dietary material , fiber -LRB- i.e. , non-digestible material such as cellulose -RRB- , seems also to be required , for both mechanical and biochemical reasons , though the exact reasons remain unclear .
Animal nutrition.0010	Molecules of carbohydrates and fats consist of carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen atoms .
Animal nutrition.0011	Carbohydrates range from simple monosaccharides -LRB- glucose , fructose , galactose -RRB- to complex polysaccharides -LRB- starch -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0012	Fats are triglycerides , made of assorted fatty acid monomers bound to glycerol backbone .
Animal nutrition.0013	Some fatty acids , but not all , are essential in the diet : they can not be synthesized in the body .
Animal nutrition.0014	Protein molecules contain nitrogen atoms in addition to carbon , oxygen , and hydrogen .
Animal nutrition.0015	The fundamental components of protein are nitrogen-containing amino acids , some of which are essential in the sense that humans can not make them internally .
Animal nutrition.0016	Some of the amino acids are convertible -LRB- with the expenditure of energy -RRB- to glucose and can be used for energy production just as ordinary glucose .
Animal nutrition.0017	By breaking down existing protein , some glucose can be produced internally ; the remaining amino acids are discarded , primarily as urea in urine .
Animal nutrition.0018	This occurs normally only during prolonged starvation .
Animal nutrition.0019	Other micronutrients include antioxidants and phytochemicals which are said to influence -LRB- or protect -RRB- some body systems .
Animal nutrition.0020	Their necessity is not as well established as in the case of , for instance , vitamins .
Animal nutrition.0021	Most foods contain a mix of some or all of the nutrient classes , together with other substances such as toxins or various sorts .
Animal nutrition.0022	Some nutrients can be stored internally -LRB- e.g. , the fat soluble vitamins -RRB- , while others are required more or less continuously .
Animal nutrition.0023	Poor health can be caused by a lack of required nutrients or , in extreme cases , too much of a required nutrient .
Animal nutrition.0024	For example , both salt and water -LRB- both absolutely required -RRB- will cause illness or even death in too large amounts .
Animal nutrition.0025	Carbohydrates Carbohydrates may be classified as monosaccharides , disaccharides , or polysaccharides depending on the number of monomer -LRB- sugar -RRB- units they contain .
Animal nutrition.0026	They constitute a large part of foods such as rice , noodles , bread , and other grain-based products .
Animal nutrition.0027	Monosaccharides contain one sugar unit , disaccharides two , and polysaccharides three or more .
Animal nutrition.0028	Polysaccharides are often referred to as complex carbohydrates because they are typically long multiple branched chains of sugar units .
Animal nutrition.0029	The difference is that complex carbohydrates take longer to digest and absorb since their sugar units must be separated from the chain before absorption .
Animal nutrition.0030	The spike in blood glucose levels after ingestion of simple sugars is thought to be related to some of the heart and vascular diseases which have become more frequent in recent times .
Animal nutrition.0031	Simple sugars form a greater part of modern diets than formerly , perhaps leading to more cardiovascular disease .
Animal nutrition.0032	The degree of causation is still not clear , however .
Animal nutrition.0033	Fat A molecule of dietary fat typically consists of several fatty acids -LRB- containing long chains of carbon and hydrogen atoms -RRB- , bonded to a glycerol .
Animal nutrition.0034	They are typically found as triglycerides -LRB- three fatty acids attached to one glycerol backbone -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0035	Fats may be classified as saturated or unsaturated depending on the detailed structure of the fatty acids involved .
Animal nutrition.0036	Saturated fats have all of the carbon atoms in their fatty acid chains bonded to hydrogen atoms , whereas unsaturated fats have some of these carbon atoms double-bonded , so their molecules have relatively fewer hydrogen atoms than a saturated fatty acid of the same length .
Animal nutrition.0037	Unsaturated fats may be further classified as monounsaturated -LRB- one double-bond -RRB- or polyunsaturated -LRB- many double-bonds -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0038	Furthermore , depending on the location of the double-bond in the fatty acid chain , unsaturated fatty acids are classified as omega-3 or omega-6 fatty acids .
Animal nutrition.0039	Trans fats are a type of unsaturated fat with trans-isomer bonds ; these are rare in nature and in foods from natural sources ; they are typically created in an industrial process called -LRB- partial -RRB- hydrogenation .
Animal nutrition.0040	Many studies have shown that unsaturated fats , particularly monounsaturated fats , are best in the human diet .
Animal nutrition.0041	Saturated fats , typically from animal sources , are next , while trans fats are to be avoided .
Animal nutrition.0042	Saturated and some trans fats are typically solid at room temperature -LRB- such as butter or lard -RRB- , while unsaturated fats are typically liquids -LRB- such as olive oil or flaxseed oil -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0043	Trans fats are very rare in nature , but have properties useful in the food processing industry , such as rancid resistance .
Animal nutrition.0044	Essential fatty acids Most fatty acids are non-essential , meaning the body can produce them as needed , generally from other fatty acids and always by expending energy to do so .
Animal nutrition.0045	However , in humans at least two fatty acids are essential and must be included in the diet .
Animal nutrition.0046	An appropriate balance of essential fatty acids - -- omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids - -- seems also important for health , though definitive experimental demonstration has been elusive .
Animal nutrition.0047	Both of these `` omega '' long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids are substrates for a class of eicosanoids known as prostaglandins , which have roles throughout the human body .
Animal nutrition.0048	They are hormones , in some respects .
Animal nutrition.0049	The omega-3 eicosapentaenoic acid -LRB- EPA -RRB- , which can be made in the human body from the omega-3 essential fatty acid alpha-linolenic acid -LRB- LNA -RRB- , or taken in through marine food sources , serves as a building block for series 3 prostaglandins -LRB- e.g. weakly inflammatory PGE3 -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0050	The omega-6 dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid -LRB- DGLA -RRB- serves as a building block for series 1 prostaglandins -LRB- e.g. anti-inflammatory PGE1 -RRB- , whereas arachidonic acid -LRB- AA -RRB- serves as a building block for series 2 prostaglandins -LRB- e.g. pro-inflammatory PGE 2 -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0051	Both DGLA and AA can be made from the omega-6 linoleic acid -LRB- LA -RRB- in the human body , or can be taken in directly through food .
Animal nutrition.0052	An appropriately balanced intake of omega-3 and omega-6 partly determines the relative production of different prostaglandins : one reason a balance between omega-3 and omega-6 is believed important for cardiovascular health .
Animal nutrition.0053	In industrialized societies , people typically consume large amounts of processed vegetable oils , which have reduced amounts of the essential fatty acids along with too much of omega-6 fatty acids relative to omega-3 fatty acids .
Animal nutrition.0054	The conversion rate of omega-6 DGLA to AA largely determines the production of the prostaglandins PGE1 and PGE2 .
Animal nutrition.0055	Omega-3 EPA prevents AA from being released from membranes , thereby skewing prostaglandin balance away from pro-inflammatory PGE2 -LRB- made from AA -RRB- toward anti-inflammatory PGE1 -LRB- made from DGLA -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0056	Moreover , the conversion -LRB- desaturation -RRB- of DGLA to AA is controlled by the enzyme delta-5-desaturase , which in turn is controlled by hormones such as insulin -LRB- up-regulation -RRB- and glucagon -LRB- down-regulation -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0057	The amount and type of carbohydrates consumed , along with some types of amino acid , can influence processes involving insulin , glucagon , and other hormones ; therefore the ratio of omega-3 versus omega-6 has wide effects on general health , and specific effects on immune function and inflammation , and mitosis -LRB- i.e. cell division -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0058	Good sources of essential fatty acids include most vegetables , nuts , seeds , and marine oils , Some of the best sources are fish , flax seed oils , soy beans , pumpkin seeds , sunflower seeds , and walnuts .
Animal nutrition.0059	Fiber Dietary fiber is a carbohydrate -LRB- or a polysaccharide -RRB- that is incompletely absorbed in humans and in some animals .
Animal nutrition.0060	Like all carbohydrates , when it is metabolized it can produce four calories -LRB- kilocalories -RRB- of energy per gram .
Animal nutrition.0061	But in most circumstances it accounts for less than that because of its limited absorption and digestibility .
Animal nutrition.0062	Dietary fiber consists mainly of cellulose , a large carbohydrate polymer that is indigestible because humans do not have the required enzymes to disassemble it .
Animal nutrition.0063	There are two subcategories : soluble and insoluble fiber .
Animal nutrition.0064	Whole grains , fruits -LRB- especially plums , prunes , and figs -RRB- , and vegetables are good sources of dietary fiber .
Animal nutrition.0065	Fiber is important to digestive health and is thought to reduce the risk of colon cancer .
Animal nutrition.0066	For mechanical reasons it can help in alleviating both constipation and diarrhea .
Animal nutrition.0067	Fiber provides bulk to the intestinal contents , and insoluble fiber especially stimulates peristalsis -- the rhythmic muscular contractions of the intestines which move digesta along the digestive tract .
Animal nutrition.0068	Some soluble fibers produce a solution of high viscosity ; this is essentially a gel , which slows the movement of food through the intestines .
Animal nutrition.0069	Additionally , fiber , perhaps especially that from whole grains , may help lessen insulin spikes and reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes .
Animal nutrition.0070	Protein Proteins are the basis of many animal body structures -LRB- e.g. muscles , skin , and hair -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0071	They also form the enyzmes which control chemical reactions throughout the body .
Animal nutrition.0072	Each molecule is composed of amino acids which are characterized by inclusion of nitrogen and sometimes sulphur -LRB- these components are responsible for the distinctive smell of burning protein , such as the keratin in hair -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0073	The body requires amino acids to produce new proteins -LRB- protein retention -RRB- and to replace damaged proteins -LRB- maintenance -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0074	As there is no protein or amino acid storage provision , amino acids must be present in the diet .
Animal nutrition.0075	Excess amino acids are discarded , typically in the urine .
Animal nutrition.0076	For all animals , some amino acids are essential -LRB- an animal can not produce them internally -RRB- and some are non-essential -LRB- the animal can produce them from other nitrogen-containing compounds -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0077	About twenty amino acids are found in the human body , and about ten of these are essential , and therefore must be included in the diet .
Animal nutrition.0078	A diet that contains adequate amounts of amino acids -LRB- especially those that are essential -RRB- is particularly important in some situations : during early development and maturation , pregnancy , lactation , or injury -LRB- a burn , for instance -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0079	A complete protein source contains all the essential amino acids ; an incomplete protein source lacks one or more of the essential amino acids .
Animal nutrition.0080	It is possible to combine two incomplete protein sources -LRB- e.g. rice and beans -RRB- to make a complete protein source , and characteristic combinations are the basis of distinct cultural cooking traditions .
Animal nutrition.0081	Sources of dietary protein include meats , tofu and other soy-products , eggs , grains , legumes , and dairy products such as milk and cheese .
Animal nutrition.0082	A few amino acids from protein can be converted into glucose and used for fuel through a process called gluconeogenesis ; this is done in quantity only during starvation .
Animal nutrition.0083	The amino acids remaining after such conversion are discarded .
Animal nutrition.0084	Minerals Dietary minerals are the chemical elements required by living organisms , other than the four elements carbon , hydrogen , nitrogen , and oxygen that are present in nearly all organic molecules .
Animal nutrition.0085	The term `` mineral '' is archaic , since the intent is to describe simply the less common elements in the diet .
Animal nutrition.0086	Some are heavier than the four just mentioned -- including several metals , which often occur as ions in the body .
Animal nutrition.0087	Some dietitians recommend that these be supplied from foods in which they occur naturally , or at least as complex compounds , or sometimes even from natural inorganic sources -LRB- such as calcium carbonate from ground oyster shells -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0088	Some are absorbed much more readily in the ionic forms found in such sources .
Animal nutrition.0089	On the other hand , minerals are often artificially added to the diet as supplements ; the most famous is likely iodine in iodized salt which prevents goiter .
Animal nutrition.0090	Macrominerals Many elements are essential in relative quantity ; they are usually called `` bulk minerals '' .
Animal nutrition.0091	Some are structural , but many play a role as electrolytes .
Animal nutrition.0092	Elements with recommended dietary allowance -LRB- RDA -RRB- greater than 200 mg/day are , in alphabetical order -LRB- with informal or folk-medicine perspectives in parentheses -RRB- : * Calcium , a common electrolyte , but also needed structurally structural -LRB- for muscle and digestive system health , bones , some forms neutralizes acidity , may help clear toxins , and provide signaling ions for nerve and membrane functions -RRB- * Chlorine as chloride ions ; very common electrolyte ; see sodium , below * Magnesium , required for processing ATP and related reactions -LRB- builds bone , causes strong peristalsis , increases flexibility , increases alkalinity -RRB- * Phosphorus , required component of bones ; essential for energy processing * Potassium , a very common electrolyte -LRB- heart and nerve health -RRB- * Sodium , a very common electrolyte ; not generally found in dietary supplements , despite being needed in large quantities , because the ion is very common in food : typically as sodium chloride , or common salt * Sulfur for three essential amino acids and therefore many proteins -LRB- skin , hair , nails , liver , and pancreas -RRB- Trace minerals Many elements are required in trace amounts , usually because they play a catalytic role in enzymes .
Animal nutrition.0093	Some trace mineral elements -LRB- RDA < 200 mg/day -RRB- are , in alphabetical order : * Cobalt required for biosynthesis of vitamin B12 family of coenzymes * Copper required component of many redox enzymes , including cytochrome c oxidase * Chromium required for sugar metabolism * Iodine required not only for the biosynthesis of thyroxin , but probably , for other important organs as breast , stomach , salivary glands , thymus etc. -LRB- see Extrathyroidal iodine -RRB- ; for this reason iodine is needed in larger quantities than others in this list , and sometimes classified with the macrominerals * Iron required for many enzymes , and for hemoglobin and some other proteins * Manganese -LRB- processing of oxygen -RRB- * Molybdenum required for xanthine oxidase and related oxidases * Nickel present in urease * Selenium required for peroxidase -LRB- antioxidant proteins -RRB- * Vanadium -LRB- Speculative : there is no established RDA for vanadium .
Animal nutrition.0094	No specific biochemical function has been identified for it in humans , although vanadium is required for some lower organisms . -RRB-
Animal nutrition.0095	* Zinc required for several enzymes such as carboxypeptidase , liver alcohol dehydrogenase , carbonic anhydrase Vitamins As with the minerals discussed above , some vitamins are recognized as essential nutrients , necessary in the diet for good health .
Animal nutrition.0096	-LRB- Vitamin D is the exception : it can alternatively be synthesized in the skin , in the presence of UVB radiation . -RRB-
Animal nutrition.0097	Certain vitamin-like compounds that are recommended in the diet , such as carnitine , are thought useful for survival and health , but these are not `` essential '' dietary nutrients because the human body has some capacity to produce them from other compounds .
Animal nutrition.0098	Moreover , thousands of different phytochemicals have recently been discovered in food -LRB- particularly in fresh vegetables -RRB- , which may have desirable properties including antioxidant activity -LRB- see below -RRB- ; experimental demonstration has been suggestive but inconclusive .
Animal nutrition.0099	Other essential nutrients not classed as vitamins include essential amino acids -LRB- see above -RRB- , choline , essential fatty acids -LRB- see above -RRB- , and the minerals discussed in the preceding section .
Animal nutrition.0100	Vitamin deficiencies may result in disease conditions : goitre , scurvy , osteoporosis , impaired immune system , disorders of cell metabolism , certain forms of cancer , symptoms of premature aging , and poor psychological health -LRB- including eating disorders -RRB- , among many others .
Animal nutrition.0101	Excess of some vitamins is also dangerous to health -LRB- notably vitamin A -RRB- , and for at least one vitamin , B6 , toxicity begins at levels not far above the required amount .
Animal nutrition.0102	Deficiency or excess of minerals can also have serious health consequences .
Animal nutrition.0103	Water About 70 % of the non-fat mass of the human body is made of water .
Animal nutrition.0104	Analysis of Adipose Tissue in Relation to Body Weight Loss in Man .
Animal nutrition.0105	Retrieved from Journal of Applied To function properly , the body requires between one and seven liters of water per day to avoid dehydration ; the precise amount depends on the level of activity , temperature , humidity , and other factors .
Animal nutrition.0106	With physical exertion and heat exposure , water loss increases and daily fluid needs will eventually increase as well .
Animal nutrition.0107	It is not fully clear how much water intake is needed by healthy people , although some experts assert that 8 -- 10 glasses of water -LRB- approximately 2 liters -RRB- daily is the minimum to maintain proper hydration .
Animal nutrition.0108	The notion that a person should consume eight glasses of water per day can not be traced to a credible scientific source .
Animal nutrition.0109	The effect of , greater or lesser , water intake on weight loss and on constipation is also still unclear .
Animal nutrition.0110	The original water intake recommendation in 1945 by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council read : `` An ordinary standard for diverse persons is 1 milliliter for each calorie of food .
Animal nutrition.0111	Most of this quantity is contained in prepared foods . ''
Animal nutrition.0112	The latest dietary reference intake report by the United States National Research Council recommended , generally , -LRB- including food sources -RRB- : 2.7 liters of water total for women and 3.7 liters for men .
Animal nutrition.0113	Specifically , pregnant and breastfeeding women need additional fluids to stay hydrated .
Animal nutrition.0114	According to the Institute of Medicine -- who recommend that , on average , women consume 2.2 litres and men 3.0 litres -- this is recommended to be 2.4 litres -LRB- approx .
Animal nutrition.0115	9 cups -RRB- for pregnant women and 3 litres -LRB- approx .
Animal nutrition.0116	12.5 cups -RRB- for breastfeeding women since an especially large amount of fluid is lost during nursing .
Animal nutrition.0117	For those who have healthy kidneys , it is somewhat difficult to drink too much water , but -LRB- especially in warm humid weather and while exercising -RRB- it is dangerous to drink too little .
Animal nutrition.0118	People can drink far more water than necessary while exercising , however , putting them at risk of water intoxication , which can be fatal .
Animal nutrition.0119	In particular large amounts of de-ionized water are dangerous .
Animal nutrition.0120	Normally , about 20 percent of water intake comes in food , while the rest comes from drinking water and assorted beverages -LRB- caffeinated included -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0121	Water is excreted from the body in multiple forms ; including urine and feces , sweating , and by water vapor in the exhaled breath .
Animal nutrition.0122	Other nutrients Other micronutrients include antioxidants and phytochemicals .
Animal nutrition.0123	These substances are generally more recent discoveries which have not yet been recognized as vitamins or as required .
Animal nutrition.0124	Phytochemicals may act as antioxidants , but not all phytochemicals are antioxidants .
Animal nutrition.0125	Antioxidants Antioxidants are a recent discovery .
Animal nutrition.0126	As cellular metabolism/energy production requires oxygen , potentially damaging -LRB- e.g. mutation causing -RRB- compounds known as free radicals can form .
Animal nutrition.0127	Most of these are oxidizers -LRB- i.e. acceptors of electrons -RRB- and some react very strongly .
Animal nutrition.0128	For normal cellular maintenance , growth , and division , these free radicals must be sufficiently neutralized by antioxidant compounds .
Animal nutrition.0129	Some are produced by the human body with adequate precursors -LRB- glutathione , Vitamin C -RRB- and those the body can not produce may only be obtained in the diet via direct sources -LRB- Vitamin C in humans , Vitamin A , Vitamin K -RRB- or produced by the body from other compounds -LRB- Beta-carotene converted to Vitamin A by the body , Vitamin D synthesized from cholesterol by sunlight -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0130	Phytochemicals -LRB- Section Below -RRB- and their subgroup polyphenols are the majority of antioxidants ; about 4,000 are known .
Animal nutrition.0131	Different antioxidants are now known to function in a cooperative network , e.g. vitamin C can reactivate free radical-containing glutathione or vitamin E by accepting the free radical itself , and so on .
Animal nutrition.0132	Some antioxidants are more effective than others at neutralizing different free radicals .
Animal nutrition.0133	Some can not neutralize certain free radicals .
Animal nutrition.0134	Some can not be present in certain areas of free radical development -LRB- Vitamin A is fat-soluble and protects fat areas , Vitamin C is water soluble and protects those areas -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0135	When interacting with a free radical , some antioxidants produce a different free radical compound that is less dangerous or more dangerous than the previous compound .
Animal nutrition.0136	Having a variety of antioxidants allows any byproducts to be safely dealt with by more efficient antioxidants in neutralizing a free radical 's butterfly effect .
Animal nutrition.0137	Phytochemicals A growing area of interest is the effect upon human health of trace chemicals , collectively called phytochemicals .
Animal nutrition.0138	These nutrients are typically found in edible plants , especially colorful fruits and vegetables , but also other organisms including seafood , algae , and fungi .
Animal nutrition.0139	The effects of phytochemicals increasingly survive rigorous testing by prominent health organizations .
Animal nutrition.0140	One of the principal classes of phytochemicals are polyphenol antioxidants , chemicals which are known to provide certain health benefits to the cardiovascular system and immune system .
Animal nutrition.0141	These chemicals are known to down-regulate the formation of reactive oxygen species , key chemicals in cardiovascular disease .
Animal nutrition.0142	Perhaps the most rigorously tested phytochemical is zeaxanthin , a yellow-pigmented carotenoid present in many yellow and orange fruits and vegetables .
Animal nutrition.0143	Repeated studies have shown a strong correlation between ingestion of zeaxanthin and the prevention and treatment of age-related macular degeneration -LRB- AMD -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0144	Less rigorous studies have proposed a correlation between zeaxanthin intake and cataracts .
Animal nutrition.0145	A second carotenoid , lutein , has also been shown to lower the risk of contracting AMD .
Animal nutrition.0146	Both compounds have been observed to collect in the retina when ingested orally , and they serve to protect the rods and cones against the destructive effects of light .
Animal nutrition.0147	Another carotenoid , beta-cryptoxanthin , appears to protect against chronic joint inflammatory diseases , such as arthritis .
Animal nutrition.0148	While the association between serum blood levels of beta-cryptoxanthin and substantially decreased joint disease has been established , neither a convincing mechanism for such protection nor a cause-and-effect have been rigorously studied .
Animal nutrition.0149	Similarly , a red phytochemical , lycopene , has substantial credible evidence of negative association with development of prostate cancer .
Animal nutrition.0150	The correlations between the ingestion of some phytochemicals and the prevention of disease are , in some cases , enormous in magnitude .
Animal nutrition.0151	Even when the evidence is obtained , translating it to practical dietary advice can be difficult and counter-intuitive .
Animal nutrition.0152	Lutein , for example , occurs in many yellow and orange fruits and vegetables and protects the eyes against various diseases .
Animal nutrition.0153	However , it does not protect the eye nearly as well as zeaxanthin , and the presence of lutein in the retina will prevent zeaxanthin uptake .
Animal nutrition.0154	Additionally , evidence has shown that the lutein present in egg yolk is more readily absorbed than the lutein from vegetable sources , possibly because of fat solubility .
Animal nutrition.0155	At the most basic level , the question `` should you eat eggs ? ''
Animal nutrition.0156	is complex to the point of dismay , including misperceptions about the health effects of cholesterol in egg yolk , and its saturated fat content .
Animal nutrition.0157	As another example , lycopene is prevalent in tomatoes -LRB- and actually is the chemical that gives tomatoes their red color -RRB- .
Animal nutrition.0158	It is more highly concentrated , however , in processed tomato products such as commercial pasta sauce , or tomato soup , than in fresh `` healthy '' tomatoes .
Animal nutrition.0159	Yet , such sauces tend to have high amounts of salt , sugar , other substances a person may wish or even need to avoid .
Animal nutrition.0160	The following table presents phytochemical groups and common sources , arranged by family : Ash Though not really a nutrient as such , an entry for ash is sometimes found on nutrition labels , especially for pet food .
Animal nutrition.0161	This entry measures the weight of inorganic material left over after the food is burned for two hours at 600 ° C. Thus , it does not include water , fibre , and nutrients that provide calories , but it does include some nutrients , such as minerals There have been some concerns that too much ash may contribute to feline urological syndrome in domestic cats .
Animal nutrition.0162	Intestinal bacterial flora It is now also known that animal intestines contain a large population of gut flora .
Animal nutrition.0163	In humans , these include species such as Bacteroides , L. acidophilus and E. coli , among many others .
Animal nutrition.0164	They are essential to digestion , and are also affected by the food we eat .
Animal nutrition.0165	Bacteria in the gut perform many important functions for humans , including breaking down and aiding in the absorption of otherwise indigestible food ; stimulating cell growth ; repressing the growth of harmful bacteria , training the immune system to respond only to pathogens ; producing vitamin B12 , and defending against some infectious diseases .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0000	bytes = `` 7078 '' > Behavioral psychotherapy is a type of psychotherapy from the behaviourism tradition , and one of two streams of thought -LRB- the other being cognitive psychotherapy -RRB- that have come together to produce cognitive behavioral therapy .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0001	Behavioral psychotherapy has a rich tradition in research and practice .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0002	From a purely behavioral perspective , behavior therapy has shown considerable success with clients from a variety of problems .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0003	Traditional behavior therapy draws from respondent conditioning and operant conditioning to solve client problems .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0004	Current forms Behavioral therapy based on operant and respondent principles has considerable evidence base to support its usage .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0005	This approach remains a vital area of clinical psychology and is often termed clinical behavior analysis .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0006	Behavioral psychotherapy has become increasingly contextual in recent years .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0007	Behavioral psychotherapy has developed greater interest in recent years in personality disorders as well as a greater focus on acceptance and complex case conceptualizations .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0008	One current form of behavioral psychotherapy is functional analytic psychotherapy .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0009	Functional analytic psychotherapy is a longer duration behavior therapy .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0010	Functional analytic therapy focuses on in-session use of reinforcement and is primarily a relationally-based therapy .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0011	As with most of the behavioral psychotherapies , functional analytic psychotherapy is contextual in its origins and nature .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0012	and draws heavily on radical behaviorism and functional contextualism .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0013	Functional analytic psychotherapy holds to a process model of research , which makes it unique compared to traditional behavior therapy and cognitive behavioral therapy .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0014	Functional analytic psychotherapy has a strong research support .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0015	Recent functional analytic psychotherapy research efforts are focusing on management of aggressive inpatients .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0016	In rehabilitation Currently , there is a greater call for behavioral psychologists to be involved in rehabilitation efforts .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0017	Supervision Recent efforts in behavioral psychotherapy have focused on the supervision process .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0018	A key point of behavioral models of supervision is that the supervisory process parallels the behavioral psychotherapy .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0019	Professional organizations The Association for Behavior Analysis International -LRB- ABAI -RRB- has a special interest group for practitioner issues , behavioral counseling , and clinical behavior analysis -LSB- http://www.abainternational.org/ ABA : I -RSB- .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0020	ABAI has larger special interest groups for autism and behavioral medicine .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0021	ABAI serves as the core intellectual home for behavior analysts .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0022	ABAI sponsors two conferences/year -- one in the U.S. and one international .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0023	The Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies -LRB- ABCT -RRB- also has an interest group in behavior analysis , which focuses on clinical behavior analysis .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0024	In addition , the Association for Behavioral an Cogntive Therapies has a special interest group on addicitons .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0025	Doctoral-level behavior analysts who are psychologists belong to American Psychological Association 's division 25 -- Behavior analysis .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0026	APA offers a diplomate in behavioral psychology .
Behavioral psychotherapy.0027	The World Association for Behavior Analysis offers a certification in behavior therapy -LSB- http://worldcenterba.com/index.html] .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0000	bytes = `` 30140 '' > Acceptance and commitment therapy or ACT -LRB- typically pronounced as a word , not as separate initials -RSB- -RRB- is a form of clinical behavior analysis -LRB- CBA -RRB- used in psychotherapy .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0001	It is an empirically-based psychological intervention that uses acceptance and mindfulness strategies mixed in different ways with commitment and behavior-change strategies , to increase psychological flexibility .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0002	The approach was originally called comprehensive distancing .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0003	It was developed in the late 1980 's by Steven C. Hayes , Kelly Wilson , and Kirk Strosahl .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0004	Basics ACT is developed within a pragmatic philosophy called functional contextualism .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0005	ACT is based on relational frame theory -LRB- RFT -RRB- , a comprehensive theory of language and cognition that is an offshoot of behavior analysis .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0006	ACT differs from traditional cognitive behavioral therapy -LRB- CBT -RRB- in that rather than trying to teach people to better control their thoughts , feelings , sensations , memories and other private events , ACT teaches them to `` just notice , '' accept , and embrace their private events , especially previously unwanted ones .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0007	ACT helps the individual get in contact with a transcendent sense of self known as `` self-as-context '' -- the you that is always there observing and experiencing and yet distinct from one 's thoughts , feelings , sensations , and memories .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0008	ACT aims to help the individual clarify their personal values and to take action on them , bringing more vitality and meaning to their life in the process , increasing their psychological flexibility .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0009	While Western psychology has typically operated under the `` healthy normality '' assumption which states that by their nature , humans are psychologically healthy , ACT assumes , rather , that psychological processes of a normal human mind are often destructive .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0010	The core conception of ACT is that psychological suffering is usually caused by experiential avoidance , cognitive entanglement , and resulting psychological rigidity that leads to a failure to take needed behavioral steps in accord with core values .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0011	As a simple way to summarize the model , ACT views the core of many problems to be due to the concepts represented in the acronym , FEAR : * Fusion with your thoughts * Evaluation of experience * Avoidance of your experience * Reason-giving for your behavior And the healthy alternative is to ACT : * Accept your reactions and be present * Choose a valued direction * Take action Core principles ACT commonly employs six core principles to help clients develop psychological flexibility : # Cognitive defusion : Learning methods to reduce the tendency to reify thoughts , images , emotions , and memories # Acceptance : Allowing thoughts to come and go without struggling with them .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0012	# Contact with the present moment : Awareness of the here and now , experienced with openness , interest , and receptiveness .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0013	# Observing the self : Accessing a transcendent sense of self , a continuity of consciousness which is unchanging .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0014	# Values : Discovering what is most important to one 's true self .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0015	# Committed action : Setting goals according to values and carrying them out responsibly .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0016	Evidence ACT had , as of October 2006 , been evaluated in about 30 controlled time series studies or randomized clinical trials for a variety of client problems .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0017	As of 2011 that number has about doubled and new controlled studies are now appearing very regularly .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0018	Overall , when compared to other treatments designed to be helpful , the effect size for ACT is a Cohen 's d of around 0.6 which is considered a medium effect size .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0019	In some studies ACT has exceeded the performance of gold standard treatments , in others it has been equally effective , and in one or two studies with minor problems it has not done as well .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0020	As compared to treatments that are already known to be effective , the effect size so far is about .3 , which is small .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0021	Across the whole empirical clinical psychology literature the average effect size for such comparisons approaches zero , however .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0022	All of these comparison and their effect sizes need to be viewed with caution , because many of the trials are unfunded and are based on a relatively small number of patients ; and in some cases might be contaminated by the allegiance effect .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0023	A large and well done trial by a major CBT research team on mixed anxiety disorders that showed superiority of ACT to gold standard CBT on the primary outcome measure has recently appeared however and in that study allegiance effects should have worked in the opposite direction , suggesting that at least some of the effects in favor of ACT are replicable by teams that are skeptical of this approach In recent years larger and better controlled trials have begun to appear and the number of areas to which it has been successfully applied is growing .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0024	ACT is considered an empirically validated treatment by the American Psychological Association , with the status of `` Modest Research Support '' in depression and `` Strong Research Support '' in chronic pain , with several others specific areas such as psychosis and work site stress currently under review .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0025	ACT is also listed as evidence-based by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration of the United States federal government which has examined randomized trials for ACT in the areas of psychosis , work site stress , and obsessive compulsive disorder , including depression outcomes .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0026	ACT is still relatively new in the development of its research base with the randomized trials beginning in earnest only after the 1999 publication of the original book on ACT .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0027	ACT has shown preliminary research evidence of effectiveness in randomized trials for a variety of problems including chronic pain , addictions , smoking cessation , depression , anxiety , psychosis , workplace stress , diabetes management , weight management , epilepsy control , self-harm , body dissatisfaction , eating disorders , burn out , and several other areas .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0028	ACT has more recently been applied to children , adolescents and trainees , with good results .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0029	Mediational analyses have provided evidence for the possible causal role of key ACT processes , including acceptance , defusion , and values , in producing beneficial clinical outcomes .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0030	Correlational evidence has also found that absence of these processes predicts many forms of psychopathology .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0031	A recent meta-analysis showed that ACT processes , on average , account for 16 -- 29 % of the variance in psychopathology -LRB- general mental health , depression , anxiety -RRB- at baseline , depending on the measure , using correlational methods .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0032	A recent meta-analysis of 68 laboratory-based studies on ACT components has also provided support for the link between psychological flexibility concepts and specific components .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0033	In New Zealand , the Department of Psychology at the University of Waikato , in conjunction with the local DHB approved research , to evaluate the effectiveness of ACT therapy -LRB- through self-help books -RRB- for people with chronic pain .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0034	The sample size was twenty-four with eligibility being reading comprehensive ability , no psychiatric disorder , stable medication and no childhood history of trauma .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0035	The method was randomised two group study conducted over a six week period with some participants required to read the self-help book and complete exercises .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0036	Pre-intervention and post-intervention questionnaires for acceptance , values illness , quality of life , satisfaction with life , depression , anxiety , and pain were completed .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0037	Interestingly , data demonstrated that those who completed the intervention evidenced statistically significant improvements -LRB- with large effect sizes -RRB- for acceptance , satisfaction with life and quality of life .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0038	Medium effect sizes were also established for enhancement in pain ratings .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0039	The findings maintained the proposition that utilising the self-help book , with minimal therapist contact adds value to the well-being of people who encounter chronic pain .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0040	Similarities ACT , Dialectical Behavior Therapy , Functional Analytic Psychotherapy , Mindfulness-based Cognitive Therapy and other acceptance and mindfulness based approaches are commonly grouped under the name The Third Wave of Behavior Therapy , with the first wave commencing in the 1920 's that related to Pavlov 's classical -LRB- respondent -RRB- and operant conditioning that was correlated to reinforcing consequences .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0041	The second wave emerged in the 1970 's and included cognition in the form of irrational beliefs , dysfunctional attitudes or depressogenic attributions .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0042	In the late 1980 's empirical limitations and philosophical misgivings of the second wave gave rise to Steven Hayes ACT theory which modified the focus of abnormal behaviour away from the content or form towards the context in which it occurs .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0043	ACT research has suggested that many of the emotional defences individuals use with conviction , to solve disorders , actually entangle humans into suffering .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0044	Steven C. Hayes described this group in his ABCT President Address as follows : ACT has also been adapted to create a non-therapy version of the same processes called Acceptance and Commitment Training .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0045	This training process , oriented towards the development of mindfulness , acceptance , and values skills in non-clinical settings such as businesses or schools , has also been investigated in a handful of research studies with good preliminary results .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0046	This is somewhat similar to the awareness -- management movement in business training programs , where mindfulness and cognitive-shifting techniques are employed .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0047	The emphasis of ACT on ongoing present moment awareness , valued directions and committed action is similar to other psycho-therapeutic approaches that , unlike ACT , are not as focused on outcome research or consciously linked to a basic science program , including more humanistic or constructivist approaches such as Gestalt Therapy , Morita Therapy and Voice Dialogue , IFS and others .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0048	Wilson , Hayes & Byrd explore at length the compatibilities between ACT and the 12-step treatment of addictions and argue that , unlike most other psychotherapies , both approaches can be implicitly or explicitly integrated due to their broad commonalities .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0049	Both approaches endorse acceptance as an alternative to unproductive control .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0050	ACT emphasizes the hopelessness of relying on ineffectual strategies to control private experience , similarly the 12-step approach emphasizes the acceptance of powerlessness over addiction .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0051	Both approaches encourage a broad life-reorientation , rather than a narrow focus on the elimination of substance use , and both place great value on the long-term project of building of a meaningful life aligned with the clients ' values .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0052	ACT and 12-step both encourage the pragmatic utility of cultivating a transcendent sense of self -LRB- higher power -RRB- within an unconventional , individualized spirituality .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0053	Finally they both openly accept the paradox that acceptance is a necessary condition for change and both encourage a playful awareness of the limitations of human thinking .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0054	Criticisms Some within the field of clinical psychology have questioned if ACT 's proposed mechanisms of change and approach to psychological experiences are different from other forms of intervention .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0055	This has led leaders in the field to critically examine the evidence supporting ACT pro and con .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0056	Professional organizations The Association for Contextual Behavioral Science is committed to research and development in the area of ACT , RFT , and contextual behavioral science more generally .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0057	As of mid 2012 it had nearly 5,700 members world wide , about half outside of the United States .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0058	It holds annual `` world conference '' meetings : The 11th will be held in Sydney in July , 2013 ; the 12th will be held in Minneapolis in summer 2014 .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0059	The Association for Behavior Analysis International -LRB- ABAI -RRB- has a special interest group for practitioner issues , behavioral counseling , and clinical behavior analysis ABA : I. ABAI has larger special interest groups for autism and behavioral medicine .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0060	ABAI serves as the core intellectual home for behavior analysts .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0061	ABAI sponsors two conferences/year -- one in the U.S. and one international .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0062	The Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies -LRB- ABCT -RRB- also has an interest group in behavior analysis , which focuses on clinical behavior analysis .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0063	ACT work is commonly presented at ABCT and other mainstream CBT organizations .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0064	The British Association for Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapies -LRB- BABCP -RRB- has a large special interest group in ACT , with over 1,200 members .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0065	Doctoral-level behavior analysts who are psychologists belong to the American Psychological Association 's division 25 -- Behavior analysis .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0066	APA offers a diplomate in behavioral psychology .
Acceptance and commitment therapy.0067	The World Association for Behavior Analysis offers certification in behavior therapy which covers knowledge of ACT .
Dar Châabane El Fehri.0000	bytes = `` 529 '' > The city of Dar Shaaban El Fehri in the Nabeul Governorate , Tunisia has a population of 35,000 inhabitants .
Dar Châabane El Fehri.0001	History The city has existed for over 1400 years .
Dar Châabane El Fehri.0002	The first to have lived in the city is a commander of the Muslim army in the year 53 of the Hegira .
Dar Châabane El Fehri.0003	The district of Sidi El Fehri was inhabited by the saint Sidi Ahmed Al Ansari to year 334 of the Hegira -LRB- see document in muselet echcherif the saint -RRB- .
Dar Chaabane.0000	bytes = `` 2387 '' > Dar Chaabane is a town and commune in the Nabeul Governorate , Tunisia .
Dar Chaabane.0001	As of 2004 it had a population of 35,859 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0000	bytes = `` 20589 '' > Ferencvárosi TC is considered to be the most successful Hungarian team either on home and international turf .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0001	They could win the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1964-65 on international level , the Hungarian National Championship I 28 times , and the Hungarian Cup 20 times .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0002	Ferencváros participated in all the first division championships since the start of Hungarian Football Championships in 1901 until the 2006/07 season in which they were relegated -LRB- demoted -RRB- to the NB II for not meeting financial criteria .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0003	Early years -LRB- 1899 -- 1920 -RRB- On 3 May 1899 Ferencvárosi TC were founded by citizens of the ninth district of Budapest .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0004	Ferenc Springer , a lawyer from the same district , was nominated as the first chairman of the club .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0005	The budget of the club was assured by the ball which was organised in order to celebrate the establishment of the club .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0006	The club 's first pitch was built on Soroksári avenue in the ninth district .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0007	On 3 December 1900 , the football department was founded officially .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0008	Two months later in February the first match of the Hungarian National Championship I was played between Ferencváros and Budapesti Torna Club .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0009	Since the match was not announced at the Hungarian Football Federation , it is not considered as the first official match of the club .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0010	Two months later on 21 April 1900 , the team played their first official match against Műegyetem .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0011	Ferencváros lost their first match 5 -- 3 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0012	The first goal of the club was scored by Gáspár Borbás .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0013	The first point in the championship was gained against Műegyetem with a draw .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0014	The first victory came on 16 June 1901 , when Ferencváros beat Budapesti Sport Club 5 -- 1 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0015	It is interesting that Ferencváros played their first official match on international turf against the Vienna Cricket and Football Club and lost by 9 -- 0 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0016	The first victory on international turf came against the Vienna Cricket and Football Club by 5 -- 0 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0017	This was the first time that the team wore the green-white striped badge which is now the emblem of the club .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0018	In 1902 Ferencváros lost to Oxford United F.C. 16 -- 0 , which the biggest defeat ever in the club 's history .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0019	In 1903 the club won their first Hungarian National Championship I title .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0020	In 1905 the club won their second championship title .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0021	All in all , the club won five championship titles in the 1900s .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0022	The club 's current stadium was inaugurated on 12 February 1911 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0023	The first goal in the new stadium was scored by Imre Schlosser .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0024	In 1912 Ferencváros could win against Woking F.C. for the first time in England .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0025	In the same year Ferencváros beat III .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0026	Kerületi TVE by 11 -- 3 -LRB- Imre Schlosser scored 8 goals which is still a clun record in one match -RRB- and became champion for the seventh time .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0027	In 1914 , many players from the club were enlisted in the First World War and many of them never returned .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0028	1920s The 1920s was not a successful period for the club , since MTK Hungária FC won the Hungarian National Championship I for ten times .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0029	In the 1924 -- 25 season Ferencváros lost 14 -- 2 to MTK Hungária FC which is still the biggest defeat in the championship .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0030	In 1926 Ferencváros could beat their rival and became champion again after 13 years .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0031	In 1926 the professional championship was formed and the team 's first professional football player was Horváth II .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0032	The first professional championship was won by Ferencváros in 1927 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0033	Ferencváros became the first team whose training was played in a movie in Budapest .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0034	In 1928 Ferencváros could win again the national championship and also the Hungarian Cup .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0035	In the same year Ferencváros won the Mitropa Cup 1928 by beating SK Rapid Wien 10 -- 6 on aggregate in the finals .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0036	This was the first trophy won on international turf .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0037	Ferencváros participated in a South American tour where the team beat surprisingly the two-time Olympic Games champion Uruguay by 3 -- 2 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0038	1930 -- 1950 In the 1930s Ferencváros won the Hungarian National Championship I four times -LRB- 1931 -- 32 , 1933 -- 34 , 1931937-38 , and 1939 -- 40 -RRB- .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0039	In the 1931 -- 32 season the team could win 22 matches out of 22 , which is still a record in the Hungarian National Championship I .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0040	During this season the team could score their 400th goal in the championship .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0041	According to the French magazine , L'Auto , Ferencváros was the seventh best team in Europe in 1933 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0042	In 1937 Ferencváros won the Mitropa Cup by beating SS Lazio 4 -- 2 in the final in Budapest .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0043	Furthermore , the team could won the Hungarian Cup twice in 1933 and in 1935 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0044	In the 1940s Ferencváros could celebrate two Hungarian National Championship I title in 1940 -- 41 and in 1948 -- 49 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0045	In the 1940 -- 41 season the team could score more than hundred goals .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0046	In the 1940s Ferencváros were the first team who flew to the United States .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0047	On 31 October 1948 , Ferencváros played their 1000th match in the Hungarian National Championship I .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0048	In the 1948 -- 49 season the team could celebrate their 50th anniversary with a gold medal .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0049	During this season the team were able to score 140 goals in 30 matches -LRB- Ferenc Deák scored 59 goals -RRB- .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0050	The team could win the Hungarian Cup three times in 1942 , in 1943 , and in 1944 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0051	In the 1950s Ferencváros could not win a championship title only a Hungarian Cup title in 1958 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0052	In 1951 the team changed their name into Kinizsi .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0053	The Golden era -LRB- 1960s -RRB- During this period Ferencváros could win the Hungarian National Championship I four times -LRB- 1963 , 1964 , 1967 , and 1968 -RRB- .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0054	On European turf Ferencváros played three finals one in the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1964-65 against Juventus F.C. , on in the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1967-68 against Leeds United A.F.C. and one in the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup 1974-75 against Dinamo Kiev .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0055	Although Ferencváros could win only the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1964-65 , they are the only Hungarian team who could win a European trophy .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0056	Inter-Cities Fairs Cup Trophy Ferencváros could win the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1964-65 -LRB- now Europa League -RRB- .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0057	Ferencváros beat Spartak Brno by 2 -- 1 on aggregate , Wiener Sport-Club by 2 -- 2 on aggregate , AS Roma by 3 -- 1 on aggregate , Athletic Bilbao by 2 -- 2 on aggregate , Manchester United F.C. by 3 -- 3 on aggregate , Juventus F.C. by 1 -- 0 in the final .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0058	The team included István Géczi , Dezső Novák , Sándor Mátrai , László Horváth , István Juhász , Pál Orosz , János Karába , Zoltán Varga , Flórián Albert , Gyula Rákosi , Máté Fenyvesi .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0059	The coach of the was József Mészáros .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0060	The 1965 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup Final was played in Turin at the Stadio Comunale di Torino in front of the home crowd of the Juventus F.C. -LRB- 40,000 spectators -RRB- .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0061	The only goal of the match came in the 74th minute when Máté Fenyvesi scored the goal .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0062	On 23 June 1965 Ferencváros became the champion of the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0063	Ferencváros could reach the quarter-final of the 1965-66 European Cup season .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0064	Ferencváros beat Keflavík Football Club by 13 -- 2 on aggregate , Panathinaikos F.C. by 3 -- 1 on aggregate , and lost to Internazionale Milano F.C. by 1 -- 5 on aggregate .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0065	Flórián Albert was named European Footballer of the Year in 1967 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0066	He has been the most successful player of the Ferencváros since the formation of the club .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0067	He scored 255 goals in 351 matches from 1958 -- 74 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0068	In the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1967-68 season Ferencváros beat FC Argeş Piteşti by 5 -- 3 on aggregate , Real Zaragoza by 4 -- 2 on aggregate , Liverpool F.C. by 2 -- 0 on aggregate , Athletic Bilbao by 4 -- 2 on aggregate , Bologna F.C. 1909 by 5 -- 4 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0069	In the first final Ferencváros lost to Leeds United A.F.C. 1 -- 0 on Elland Road and in the second match in the Népstadion -LRB- now Puskás Ferenc Stadium -RRB- the result was 0 -- 0 in front of 76,000 spectators , therefore Ferencváros could not celebrate their second title in the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0070	1970s In the 1970s Ferencváros could win the Hungarian National Championship I only once in 1976 , but they were more successful in the Hungarian Cup which they won four times -LRB- 1972 , 1974 , 1976 , and 1978 -RRB- .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0071	Ferencváros could reach the semi-finals of the UEFA Cup 1971-72 season .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0072	Ferencváros beat Fenerbahçe S.K. by 4 -- 2 on aggregate , Panionios NFC , Eintracht Braunschweig by 6 -- 3 , FK Željezničar Sarajevo by 3 -- 3 , and lost to Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. in the semi-finals by 3 -- 4 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0073	On 17 March 1974 the legendary and iconic Flórián Albert pleyed his last match and obviously said adieu with a goal .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0074	In the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup 1974-75 season Ferencváros beat Cardiff City F.C. by 6 -- 1 on aggregate , Liverpool F.C. by 1 -- 1 on aggregate , Malmö FF by 4 -- 2 on aggregate , FK Crvena Zvezda by 4 -- 3 on aggregate , but lost to Dinamo Kiev by 3 -- 0 in the final .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0075	1980s and 1990s In the 1980s Ferencváros could won the championship only once in the 1980 -- 81 season .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0076	Tibor Nyilasi was awarded Silver Shoes by scoring 30 goals in one season .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0077	During the management of Tibor Nyilasi Ferencváros won the Hungarian National Championship I in 1992 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0078	Ferencváros also won the Hungarian Cup three times .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0079	During the management of the two Olympic Games gold medalist , and Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1964-65 trophy winner Dezső Novák Ferencváros won the Hungarian National Championship I twice in 1995 and in 1996 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0080	Novák 's team were also successful on international level .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0081	Ferencváros were the first Hungarian team to qualify for the UEFA Champions League group phase in 1995 by beating Anderlecht in the qualifying matches .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0082	Ferencváros beat Grasshoppers on away ground and held Grasshoppers and Real Madrid to a draw at home , but were eliminated in the group stage .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0083	They also conceded 19 goals during the 6 group phase games which is still a tied negative record in Champions League as of 2010 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0084	Ferencváros were runner up in the Hungarian National Championship I during the second management of Tibor Nyilasi .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0085	Ups and downs -LRB- 2000s -RRB- In 2003 Ferencváros entered the Budapest Stock Exchange as the first Hungarian club which take a step to become a public limited company .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0086	Ferencváros were eliminated form the UEFA Champions League 2004-05 by Sparta Prague and therefore they could console themselves in the UEFA Cup .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0087	Ferencváros could reach the group stages of the UEFA Cup 2004-05 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0088	Ferencváros beat Millwall F.C. by 4 -- 2 on aggregate .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0089	In the group stage they could beat Hearts of Midlothian by 1 -- 0 , drew against Feyenoord Rotterdam , and lost to FC Basel and Schalke 04 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0090	In 2004 Ferencváros launched a wide-ranging anti-racism campaign in order to get rid of intolerance and discrimination in football .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0091	In 2004-05 season Ferencváros finished second and therefore qualified for the UEFA Cup .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0092	Ferencváros entered the 2005-06 UEFA Cup season and lost against the Belarus FC Partizan Minsk .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0093	In the first leg Ferencváros lost 2-0 , while they won away 2-1 , but on 3-2 aggregate they were eliminated from the UEFA Cup .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0094	In July 2006 , the club was removed from the national first division as punishment for continued financial troubles .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0095	The club has recently challenged the legality of this move in court .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0096	Ferencváros has won the case as the verdict declared that the FA 's move was against the law .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0097	An out-of-court agreement between the club and the Hungarian Football Federation has been reached .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0098	In the season 2006/07 , Nyíregyháza beat Ferencváros to promotion in a tight contest , ensuring that Ferencváros stayed in the second division .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0099	Despite investments in players , including former Ferencváros stars , the season 2007/08 brought further trouble .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0100	This time Kecskemét and Szolnok both outran Fradi in the NB II -LRB- Eastern Group -RRB- title race .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0101	In the 2008/09 season , however , FTC has finally secured its return to the NB I .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0102	In February 2008 , Kevin McCabe , chairman of English football club Sheffield United , finalised an agreement with the club to buy its football team and with the Hungarian government to purchase and develop the ground around Stadion Albert Flórián .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0103	In April 2008 , Ferencváros Torna Club officially agreed to sell the football club , Ferencváros Labdarúgó ZRt .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0104	to Esplanade Kft , McCabe 's company in Hungary .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0105	The development of a new all-seater football stadium with a capacity of 25,000 has been started .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0106	` The Blades ' already own a Chinese club -- the Chengdu Blades and have an interest in clubs in Belgium , Côte d'Ivoire , and Australia , and an exchange of ideas relationship with São Paulo .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0107	In 2009 Craig Short was nominated as the new manager of the club .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0108	The club returned on 22 May 2009 to the Soproni Liga after a three year absence .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0109	2010s In January 2010 Ferencváros signed Anthony Elding from Crewe Alexandra of League Two .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0110	Elding scored eight goals in 15 matches .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0111	In May 2010 Péter Lipcsei broke the team 's appearance record after he played his 647th game for Ferencváros as they beat Lombard Pápa 2-0 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0112	In April 2010 the Ferencváros , Ajax and Aberdeen FC legend Zoltán Varga died .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0113	2010-11 season In 2010 László Prukner became the coach of Ferencváros .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0114	In the 2010-11 Nemzeti Bajnokság I Ferencváros finished third .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0115	In the last round Ferencváros were competing with Zalaegerszegi TE and Debreceni VSC for the third position of the Hungarian Championship .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0116	Ferencváros beat Lombard-Pápa TFC 3-0 in the Albert Stadion , therefore Ferencváros finished third .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0117	This was the final season for Attila Dragóner who also scored a goal in his last match at the Albert Stadion .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0118	Consequently the team qualified for the Europa League 2011-12 season .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0119	2011-12 season Ferencváros signed a one-year contract with their former player Krisztián Lisztes and with Mark Otten .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0120	Ferencváros were drawn against the Armenian Ulisses in the first round of the UEFA Europa League 2011-12 season .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0121	Ferencvaros beat the Armenian club by 3-0 at home in the Albert Stadion .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0122	The goals were scored by György Józsi , Mark Otten , and Felipe Almeida Félix .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0123	In the away match Ferencvaros could beat Ulisses 2-0 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0124	The goals were scored by Liban Abdi and Lóránt Oláh .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0125	In the second round Ferencvaros played with the Norwegian Aalesunds FK .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0126	The first match finished with a 2-1 victory at home in the Albert Stadion .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0127	The two Hungarian goals were scored by Lóránt Oláh and Liban Abdi , while the Norwegian one by Solomon Okoronkwo .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0128	The second leg of the match was won by Aalesunds by 2-1 and the Norwegian team won 3-1 on aggregate after extra time .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0129	Ferencváros 's season in the 2011-12 Hungarian league started as a nightmare .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0130	After two draws against Kaposvár and Diósgyőr they lost to Debrecen , Pécs , Honvéd , and Haladás .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0131	Before the match against Haladás László Prukner resigned .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0132	The club appointed Tamás Nagy as the new temporary coach for couple of matches .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0133	On 31 October 2011 , the legend of the club Flórián Albert died at the age of 70 .
History of Ferencvárosi TC.0134	He was the only Hungarian football player who won the prize Ballon d'Or .
Ferencvárosi TC.0000	bytes = `` 65356 '' > Ferencvárosi TC or FTC , simply known as Ferencváros , nicknamed Fradi , is a sport club in Hungary , founded in 1899 by Ferenc Springer and a group of local residents of Budapest 's ninth district , Ferencváros .
Ferencvárosi TC.0001	Ferencváros is best known for winning the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1964-65 -LRB- now Europa League -RRB- in 1965 by beating Juventus F.C. in the final .
Ferencvárosi TC.0002	The best-known part of the club is the well-supported men 's football team -- the most popular team in the country .
Ferencvárosi TC.0003	Other divisions include the women 's football , women 's handball , men 's futsal , men 's ice hockey , men 's handball , men 's water polo , cycling , gymnastics , athletics , wrestling , curling and swimming teams , some of which are highly successful .
Ferencvárosi TC.0004	The club colours are green and white , and the club mascot is a green eagle ; hence another of the club 's nicknames , ` The Green Eagles ' .
Ferencvárosi TC.0005	History Ferencváros is the most successful Hungarian team on both home and international turf .
Ferencvárosi TC.0006	They won the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1964-65 , and have won the Hungarian National Championship I 28 times and the Hungarian Cup 20 times .
Ferencvárosi TC.0007	Ferencváros participated in all the first division championships since the start of Hungarian Football Championships in 1901 until the 2006/07 season in which they were relegated to the NB II for not meeting financial criteria .
Ferencvárosi TC.0008	Early years -LRB- 1899 -- 1920 -RRB- On 3 May 1899 , Ferencvárosi TC was founded by citizens of the ninth district of Budapest .
Ferencvárosi TC.0009	Ferenc Springer , a lawyer from the same district , was nominated as the first chairman of the club .
Ferencvárosi TC.0010	The club 's budget was raised by a ball held in order to celebrate the establishment of the club .
Ferencvárosi TC.0011	The club 's first pitch was built on Soroksári avenue in the ninth district .
Ferencvárosi TC.0012	On 3 December 1900 , the football department was officially founded .
Ferencvárosi TC.0013	Two months later , in February , the first match of the Hungarian National Championship I was played between Ferencváros and Budapesti Torna Club .
Ferencvárosi TC.0014	Since the match was not announced to the Hungarian Football Federation , it is not considered as the club 's first official match .
Ferencvárosi TC.0015	Two months later , on 21 April 1900 , the team played their first official match against Műegyetem .
Ferencvárosi TC.0016	Ferencváros lost their first match 5 -- 3 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0017	The first goal for the club was scored by Gáspár Borbás .
Ferencvárosi TC.0018	The first point in the championship was gained against Műegyetem with a draw .
Ferencvárosi TC.0019	The first victory came on 16 June 1901 , when Ferencváros beat Budapesti Sport Club 5 -- 1 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0020	Ferencváros played their first official match outside Hungary against Vienna Cricket and Football Club and lost 9 -- 0 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0021	The first victory outside Hungary was a 5-0 victory against Vienna Cricket and Football Club .
Ferencvárosi TC.0022	This was the first time the team wore the green-white striped badge which is now the emblem of the club .
Ferencvárosi TC.0023	In 1902 , Ferencváros lost 16-0 to Oxford United F.C. , the biggest ever defeat in the club 's history .
Ferencvárosi TC.0024	In 1903 , the club won their first Hungarian National Championship I title , and their second in 1905 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0025	All in all , the club won five championship titles in the 1900s .
Ferencvárosi TC.0026	On 12 February 1911 , the club 's current stadium was inaugurated .
Ferencvárosi TC.0027	The first goal in the new stadium was scored by Imre Schlosser .
Ferencvárosi TC.0028	In 1912 , Ferencváros won for the first time in England against Woking F.C. .
Ferencvárosi TC.0029	In the same year , Ferencváros beat III .
Ferencvárosi TC.0030	Kerületi TVE 11 -- 3 -LRB- Imre Schlosser scored 8 goals which is still a club record for a single match -RRB- and were crowned champions for the seventh time .
Ferencvárosi TC.0031	1914 -LRB- the beginning of the First World War -RRB- is considered as the saddest year in the club history , as many of the club 's players were enlisted and many of them never returned .
Ferencvárosi TC.0032	1920s The 1920s was not a successful period for the club , since MTK Hungária FC won the Hungarian National Championship I for ten times .
Ferencvárosi TC.0033	In the 1924 -- 25 season Ferencváros lost 14 -- 2 to MTK Hungária FC which is still the biggest defeat in the championship .
Ferencvárosi TC.0034	In 1926 Ferencváros beat their rivals and became champion again after 13 years .
Ferencvárosi TC.0035	In 1926 the professional championship was formed and the team 's first professional football player was Horváth II .
Ferencvárosi TC.0036	The first professional championship was won by Ferencváros in 1927 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0037	Ferencváros became the first team whose training was featured in a movie in Budapest .
Ferencvárosi TC.0038	In 1928 Ferencváros again won the national championship and also the Hungarian Cup .
Ferencvárosi TC.0039	In the same year Ferencváros won the Mitropa Cup 1928 by beating SK Rapid Wien 10 -- 6 on aggregate in the final .
Ferencvárosi TC.0040	This was the first trophy won outside of Hungary .
Ferencvárosi TC.0041	Ferencváros participated in a South American tour , where the team surprisingly beat the two-time Olympic Games champions Uruguay 3 -- 2 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0042	1930 -- 1950 In the 1930s , Ferencváros won the Hungarian National Championship I four times -LRB- 1931 -- 32 , 1933 -- 34 , 1931937-38 , and 1939 -- 40 -RRB- .
Ferencvárosi TC.0043	In the 1931 -- 32 season , the team won all 22 matches , which is still a record in the Hungarian National Championship I .
Ferencvárosi TC.0044	During this season the team scored their 400th goal in the championship .
Ferencvárosi TC.0045	According to the French magazine , L'Auto , Ferencváros was the seventh best team in Europe in 1933 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0046	In 1937 Ferencváros won the Mitropa Cup by beating SS Lazio 4 -- 2 in the final in Budapest .
Ferencvárosi TC.0047	Furthermore , The team won the Hungarian Cup twice in 1933 and in 1935 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0048	In the 1940s , Ferencváros celebrated two Hungarian National Championship I titles in 1940 -- 41 and in 1948 -- 49 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0049	In the 1940 -- 41 season the team scored more than one hundred goals .
Ferencvárosi TC.0050	In the 1940s , Ferencváros were the first team to fly to the United States .
Ferencvárosi TC.0051	On 31 October 1948 , Ferencváros played their 1000th match in the Hungarian National Championship I .
Ferencvárosi TC.0052	In the 1948 -- 49 season , the team celebrated their 50th anniversary with a gold medal .
Ferencvárosi TC.0053	During this season the team scored 140 goals in 30 matches -LRB- Ferenc Deák scored 59 goals -RRB- .
Ferencvárosi TC.0054	The team won the Hungarian Cup three times in 1942 , 1943 , and 1944 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0055	In the 1950s Ferencváros , failed to win a championship title , only securing a Hungarian Cup title in 1958 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0056	In 1951 , the team changed their name to Kinizsi .
Ferencvárosi TC.0057	The Golden era -LRB- 1960s -RRB- During this period Ferencváros won the Hungarian National Championship I four times -LRB- 1963 , 1964 , 1967 , and 1968 -RRB- .
Ferencvárosi TC.0058	Ferencváros played in three European finals , the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1964-65 against Juventus F.C. , the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1967-68 against Leeds United A.F.C. and the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup 1974-75 against Dinamo Kiev .
Ferencvárosi TC.0059	Although Ferencváros only won the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1964-65 , they are the only Hungarian team to win a European trophy .
Ferencvárosi TC.0060	Inter-Cities Fairs Cup Trophy Ferencváros won the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1964-65 -LRB- now Europa League -RRB- .
Ferencvárosi TC.0061	Ferencváros beat Spartak Brno 2 -- 1 on aggregate , Wiener Sport-Club 2 -- 2 on aggregate , AS Roma 3 -- 1 on aggregate , Athletic Bilbao 2 -- 2 on aggregate , Manchester United F.C. 3 -- 3 on aggregate and Juventus F.C. 1 -- 0 in the final .
Ferencvárosi TC.0062	The 1965 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup Final was played on 23 June 1965 in Turin at the Stadio Comunale di Torino in front of the home crowd of Juventus F.C. -LRB- 40,000 spectators -RRB- .
Ferencvárosi TC.0063	The only goal of the match was scored in the 74th minute by Máté Fenyvesi .
Ferencvárosi TC.0064	Ferencváros only reached the quarter-finals of the 1965-66 European Cup .
Ferencvárosi TC.0065	Ferencváros beat Keflavík Football Club 13 -- 2 on aggregate , Panathinaikos F.C. 3 -- 1 on aggregate , and lost to Internazionale Milano F.C. 1 -- 5 on aggregate .
Ferencvárosi TC.0066	Flórián Albert was named European Footballer of the Year in 1967 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0067	He is the most successful Ferencváros since the formation of the club , scoring 255 goals in 351 matches from 1958 -- 74 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0068	In the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1967-68 , Ferencváros beat FC Argeş Piteşti 5 -- 3 on aggregate , Real Zaragoza 4 -- 2 on aggregate , Liverpool F.C. 2 -- 0 on aggregate , Athletic Bilbao 4 -- 2 on aggregate and Bologna F.C. 1909 5 -- 4 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0069	In the first leg of the final , Ferencváros lost 1 -- 0 to Leeds United A.F.C. at Elland Road , and drew 0-0 in the second match at the Népstadion -LRB- now Puskás Ferenc Stadium -RRB- in front of 76,000 spectators , maening Ferencváros failed to claim their second Inter-Cities Fairs Cup title .
Ferencvárosi TC.0070	1970s In the 1970s , Ferencváros won the Hungarian National Championship I only once , in 1976 , but were more successful in the Hungarian Cup , which they won four times -LRB- 1972 , 1974 , 1976 , and 1978 -RRB- .
Ferencvárosi TC.0071	Ferencváros reached the semi-finals of the UEFA Cup 1971-72 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0072	Ferencváros beat Fenerbahçe S.K. 4 -- 2 on aggregate , Panionios NFC , Eintracht Braunschweig 6 -- 3 , FK Željezničar Sarajevo 3 -- 3 , and lost 3-4 to Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. in the semi-finals .
Ferencvárosi TC.0073	On 17 March 1974 , the legendary and iconic Flórián Albert played his last match and said adieu with a goal .
Ferencvárosi TC.0074	In the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup 1974-75 , Ferencváros beat Cardiff City F.C. 6 -- 1 on aggregate , Liverpool F.C. 1 -- 1 on aggregate , Malmö FF 4 -- 2 on aggregate , FK Crvena Zvezda 4 -- 3 on aggregate , but lost 3-0 to Dinamo Kiev 3 -- 0 in the final .
Ferencvárosi TC.0075	1980s and 1990s In the 1980s , Ferencváros only won the championship once in the 1980 -- 81 season .
Ferencvárosi TC.0076	Tibor Nyilasi was awarded the Silver Shoes by scoring 30 goals in one season .
Ferencvárosi TC.0077	Under the management of Tibor Nyilasi , Ferencváros won the Hungarian National Championship I in 1992 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0078	Ferencváros also won the Hungarian Cup three times .
Ferencvárosi TC.0079	Under the management of two-time Olympic Games gold medalist , and Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1964-65 trophy winner Dezső Novák , Ferencváros won the Hungarian National Championship I twice in 1995 and in 1996 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0080	Novák 's team were also successful internationally .
Ferencvárosi TC.0081	Ferencváros were the first Hungarian team to qualify for the UEFA Champions League group phase in 1995 by beating Anderlecht in the qualifying matches .
Ferencvárosi TC.0082	In the first leg of the qualifying round Ferencváros beat Anderlect 1-0 away .
Ferencvárosi TC.0083	At the Albert Stadion Ferencváros drew with the Belgian champion -LRB- 1-1 -RRB- , to qualify for the group stagesof the Champions League .
Ferencvárosi TC.0084	On 13 September 1995 , Ferencváros beat Grasshoppers 3-0 away .
Ferencvárosi TC.0085	Krisztián Lisztes and Ottó Vincze -LRB- 2 -RRB- scored the goals for the Hungarians .
Ferencvárosi TC.0086	In the second match of the group stages Ferencváros debuted at the Albert Stadion against the Dutch champion Ajax Amsterdam .
Ferencvárosi TC.0087	The final result was 5-1 to the Dutch club .
Ferencvárosi TC.0088	On 18 October , Ferencváros played at the Estadio Santiago Bernabéu against La Liga champions Real Madrid .
Ferencvárosi TC.0089	The final result was 6-1 to Spanish giant .
Ferencvárosi TC.0090	On 1 November Real Madrid visited the Albert Stadion , and the result was 1-1 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0091	The penultimate match in the group stages was against the Swiss champions Grasshoppers .
Ferencvárosi TC.0092	The result was 3-3 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0093	The last match of the group stages was played at the Olympisch Stadion against Ajax Amsterdam .
Ferencvárosi TC.0094	Ajax won 4-0 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0095	Ferencváros finished third in the group and were eliminated from the group stage .
Ferencvárosi TC.0096	They also conceded 19 goals during the 6 group phase games which is still a tied negative record in Champions League as of 2010 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0097	Ferencváros were runner up in the Hungarian National Championship I during the second period of management by Tibor Nyilasi .
Ferencvárosi TC.0098	Ups and downs -LRB- 2000s -RRB- In 2003 , Ferencváros were listed on the Budapest Stock Exchange , the first Hungarian club to become a public limited company .
Ferencvárosi TC.0099	Ferencváros were eliminated from the UEFA Champions League 2004-05 by Sparta Prague and therefore entered the UEFA Cup .
Ferencvárosi TC.0100	Ferencváros reached the group stages of the UEFA Cup 2004-05 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0101	Ferencváros beat Millwall F.C. 4 -- 2 on aggregate .
Ferencvárosi TC.0102	In the group stage they defeated Hearts of Midlothian 1 -- 0 , drew against Feyenoord Rotterdam , and lost to FC Basel and Schalke 04 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0103	In 2004 , Ferencváros launched a wide-ranging anti-racism campaign in order to eliminate intolerance and discrimination in football .
Ferencvárosi TC.0104	In the 2004 -- 05 season , Ferencváros finished second and therefore qualified for the UEFA Cup .
Ferencvárosi TC.0105	Ferencváros entered the 2005-06 UEFA Cup and lost to Belarussian side FC Partizan Minsk .
Ferencvárosi TC.0106	In the first leg Ferencváros lost 2 -- 0 , while they won away 2 -- 1 , but lost 3 -- 2 aggregate and were eliminated from the UEFA Cup .
Ferencvárosi TC.0107	In July 2006 , the club was relegated from the national first division as punishment for continued financial difficulties .
Ferencvárosi TC.0108	The club challenged the legality of this move in court .
Ferencvárosi TC.0109	Ferencváros won the case as the verdict declared that the FA 's move was against the law .
Ferencvárosi TC.0110	An out-of-court agreement between the club and the Hungarian Football Federation was reached .
Ferencvárosi TC.0111	In the season 2006/07 , Nyíregyháza beat Ferencváros to promotion in a tight contest , ensuring that Ferencváros stayed in the second division .
Ferencvárosi TC.0112	Despite investments in players , including former Ferencváros stars , the season 2007/08 brought further trouble .
Ferencvárosi TC.0113	This time Kecskemét and Szolnok both outran Fradi in the NB II -LRB- Eastern Group -RRB- title race .
Ferencvárosi TC.0114	In the 2008/09 season , however , FTC finally secured its return to the NB I .
Ferencvárosi TC.0115	In February 2008 , Kevin McCabe , chairman of English football club Sheffield United , finalised an agreement with the club to buy its football team and with the Hungarian government to purchase and develop the ground around Stadion Albert Flórián .
Ferencvárosi TC.0116	In April 2008 , Ferencváros Torna Club officially agreed to sell the football club , Ferencváros Labdarúgó ZRt .
Ferencvárosi TC.0117	to Esplanade Kft. , McCabe 's company in Hungary .
Ferencvárosi TC.0118	The development of a new all-seater football stadium with a capacity of 25,000 has been started .
Ferencvárosi TC.0119	` The Blades ' own a Chinese club -- the Chengdu Blades -- and have an interest in clubs in Belgium , Côte d'Ivoire , and Australia , and an exchange of ideas relationship with São Paulo .
Ferencvárosi TC.0120	In 2009 Craig Short was nominated as the new manager of the club .
Ferencvárosi TC.0121	The club returned to the Soproni Liga on 22 May 2009 after a three year absence .
Ferencvárosi TC.0122	2010s In 2010 , László Prukner became the coach of Ferencváros .
Ferencvárosi TC.0123	In the 2010 -- 11 Hungarian League , Ferencváros finished third .
Ferencvárosi TC.0124	In the last round Ferencváros were competing with Zalaegerszegi TE and Debreceni VSC for third place in the Hungarian Championship .
Ferencvárosi TC.0125	Ferencváros beat Lombard-Pápa TFC 3 -- 0 in the Albert Stadion , meaning Ferencváros finished third .
Ferencvárosi TC.0126	Ferencváros beat Armenian Ulisses in the first round of the UEFA Europa League 2011-12 season .
Ferencvárosi TC.0127	In the second round of the Europa League , Ferencvaros beat the Norwegian Aalesunds FK 2-1 at the Albert Stadion but lost 2-1 in Ålesund , Norway .
Ferencvárosi TC.0128	Aalesunds scored a goal in the 119th minute and Ferencváros was eliminated from the Europa League .
Ferencvárosi TC.0129	In September 2011 , Lajos Détári was appointed as manager of the club due to the resignation of László Prukner after several defeats in the Hungarian League and the early exit from the Europa League .
Ferencvárosi TC.0130	Ferencváros won the first match under Détári 2-0 against Zalaegerszeg , which was coached by Ferencváros 's former coach László Prukner .
Ferencvárosi TC.0131	On 31 October 2011 , club legend Flórián Albert died at the age of 70 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0132	He was the only Hungarian football player who won the Ballon d'Or .
Ferencvárosi TC.0133	On 21 August 2012 , the Dutch Ricardo Moniz was appointed as the new manager of the club after the 2-1 defeat against arch-rival Újpest .
Ferencvárosi TC.0134	On 22 August 2012 , the president of the football club , Gábor Kubatov announced to the Hungarian newspaper Magyar Nemzet , that the construction of the new Albert Flórián Stadium is going to be started in January 2013 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0135	The stadium will have 22.800 seats and it will be suited for families and neutral spectators as well .
Ferencvárosi TC.0136	The new stadium itself is going to be rotated compared to the current one and will meet UEFA Stadium Category IV 's requirements .
Ferencvárosi TC.0137	The planned finish date is in 2014 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0138	`` The main goal is the security , it will be similar to Mainz 's stadium , there will be no fence '' said Gábor Kubatov The final Újpest-derby of the Flórián Albert Stadium was held on 10 March 2013 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0139	The game finished with a Ferencváros victory , Čukić scored at the 93 ' minute , setting the final score of 2-1 , causing the 17,000 fans being in euphoria for the next few days .
Ferencvárosi TC.0140	On 18 March 2013 , it was announced that Ferencváros will play their last match against CFR Cluj at the Stadium Albert Flórián .
Ferencvárosi TC.0141	On 19 March 2013 , it was announced that Ferencváros will play their home matches at the Ferenc Puskás Stadium .
Ferencvárosi TC.0142	On 20 March , it was announced that the bid for the selection of the construction company was closed and the winner of the tender is Market építő Zrt .
Ferencvárosi TC.0143	The cost of the construction is 13.5 billion Hungarian Forints .
Ferencvárosi TC.0144	The construction of the new stadium is expected to be completed by the autumn of 2014 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0145	On 24 March 2013 , Ferencváros played their last match against CFR Cluj at home .
Ferencvárosi TC.0146	The match finished with a goalless draw .
Ferencvárosi TC.0147	The starting line-up included former Ferencvaros players such as Dragóner , Lipcsei , Balog , Rósa and Lisztes .
Ferencvárosi TC.0148	On 28 march 2013 , the foundation-stone of the new stadium was held down along with a time-capsule containing letters from the fans and photos of the former stadium .
Ferencvárosi TC.0149	Players First team squad As of 21 February , 2013 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0150	Retired numbers * 2 - Tibor Simon , Defender -LRB- 1985 -- 99 -RRB- - posthumous honour .
Ferencvárosi TC.0151	* 12 -- `` The 12th man '' , reserved for club supporters .
Ferencvárosi TC.0152	Number retired in 2007 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0153	Notable former players Received senior international cap -LRB- s -RRB- for their respective countries while playing for Ferencvárosi TC .
Ferencvárosi TC.0154	* Adnan Ahmed * Flórián Albert * Flórián Albert , Jr. * László Bálint * Zoltán Blum * Gáspár Borbás * Sándor Bródy * László Budai * Márton Bukovi * Zoltán Bükszegi * Zoltán Czibor * Jenő Dalnoki * Ferenc Deák * Lajos Détári * Attila Dragóner * József Eisenhoffer * Babatunde Fatusi * Gyula Feldmann * Máté Fenyvesi * Pál Fischer * István Géczi * Zoltán Gera * Gábor Gyepes * Justin Haber * József Háda * Juha Hakola * Ferenc Horváth * János Hrutka * Szabolcs Huszti * István Juhász * Adem Kapič * Tibor Kemény * Sándor Kocsis * Vilmos Kohut * Béla Kovács * Lajos Kű * Károly Lakat * Gyula Lázár * Leandro * Miklós Lendvai * Zsolt Limperger * Péter Lipcsei * Krisztián Lisztes * Antal Lyka * Győző Martos * Sándor Mátrai * János Mátyus * James Morrison * Andrej Prean Nagy * Sándor Nemes * Rudolph Nickolsburger * Dezső Novák * Tibor Nyilasi * Miklós Páncsics * Attila Pinte * Gyula Polgár * Gábor Pölöskei * Gyula Rákosi * Dénes Rósa * Béla Sárosi * György Sárosi * André Schembri * Imre Schlosser * Ernő Schwarz * Tibor Simon * Vilmos Sipos * Thomas Sowunmi * István Szőke * Ákos Takács * Mihai Tänzer * Attila Tököli * Géza Toldi * István Tóth * Dániel Tőzsér * Ottó Vincze * Dragan Vukmir * Rafe Wolfe Colours , badge , and nicknames Ferencváros 's colours of green and white represents the traditional colours of the coat of arms of Ferencváros -LRB- the ninth district of Budapest .
Ferencvárosi TC.0155	The three e letters , which can be found in the team 's badge , mean Erkölcs , Erő and Egyetértés -LRB- in English morality , power , and agreement -RRB- .
Ferencvárosi TC.0156	The mascot of the club is the Green Eagle , however , it is not represented in the official logo of the team .
Ferencvárosi TC.0157	Before the matches the mascot always appears on the turf and enthuse the spectators .
Ferencvárosi TC.0158	Popular nicknames for the club are Fradi and Green Eagles .
Ferencvárosi TC.0159	Anthem Hajrá , Fradi !
Ferencvárosi TC.0160	Hajrá , Fradi !
Ferencvárosi TC.0161	Hajrá , fiúk , mert fő a győzelem !
Ferencvárosi TC.0162	Hajrá , Ferencváros !
Ferencvárosi TC.0163	Hajrá , Ferencváros !
Ferencvárosi TC.0164	Hajrá , Fradi , hajrá , Fradi Hajrá , fiúk , mert fő a győzelem !
Ferencvárosi TC.0165	Száz kisleány , egy gólra vár Száz csókot ád majd a győztes meccs után !
Ferencvárosi TC.0166	Hajrá , Fradi , hajrá , Fradi Hajrá , fiúk , csak tovább És süvít a labda A hálóba varrva Hajrá , hajrá , FTC !
Ferencvárosi TC.0167	Its English translation is : Go Fradi !
Ferencvárosi TC.0168	Go Fradi !
Ferencvárosi TC.0169	Go boys 'cause the victory is the most important !
Ferencvárosi TC.0170	Go Ferencváros !
Ferencvárosi TC.0171	Go Ferencváros !
Ferencvárosi TC.0172	Go Fradi , go Fradi Go lads 'cause the victory is the most important !
Ferencvárosi TC.0173	One hundred little girls are waiting for a goal They will give one hundred kisses after the game !
Ferencvárosi TC.0174	Go Fradi , go Fradi Go lads go and the ball flies kicked into the net Go Fradi go FTC !
Ferencvárosi TC.0175	Supporters and rivalries Ferencváros are the most supported football club in Hungary .
Ferencvárosi TC.0176	Fans of the club are not only from the 9th district -LRB- called Ferencváros -RRB- of Budapest , but from all over Hungary .
Ferencvárosi TC.0177	In Hungarian football Ferencváros are a club with many rivalries .
Ferencvárosi TC.0178	First and foremost is their rivalry with Újpest FC -LRB- see for more details Ferencváros TC and Újpest FC rivalry -RRB- , the club which is considered as their arch-rival .
Ferencvárosi TC.0179	The derby between the two is also called the Budapest derby and it is amongst the most heated and emotional footballing rivalries in the region .
Ferencvárosi TC.0180	Ferencváros are also in rivalry with MTK Hungária FC , Budapest Honvéd FC , and in the 2000s with Debreceni VSC .
Ferencvárosi TC.0181	The matches between these teams are always very tense and sometimes include violence .
Ferencvárosi TC.0182	Ferencváros has a selection of celebrity supporters such as the singer Péter Máté , the formula one driver Zsolt Baumgartner , the chess-player Peter Leko , the actor Károly Eperjes , the ethnographer and politician Gyula Ortutay , and the singer Attila Pataky .
Ferencvárosi TC.0183	Stadium The home stadium of Ferencváros is Stadion Albert Flórián which is located in Ferencváros , Budapest .
Ferencvárosi TC.0184	The stadium has a capacity of 18,100 , set to be expanded to 25,000 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0185	Formerly known as Üllői úti stadion for its location , it has been renamed for Ballon d'Or winner club legend Flórián Albert Sr. in 2007 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0186	The first stadium was started to be built in the autumn of 1910 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0187	On 12 February 1911 , Ferencváros played their first match against Budapest rival MTK Budapest which was won by the club .
Ferencvárosi TC.0188	The starting line-up consisted of Fritz , Rumbold , Magnlitz , Weinber , Bródy , Payer , Szeitler , Weisz , Koródy , Schlosser , Borbás .
Ferencvárosi TC.0189	The first stadium could host 40,000 spectators .
Ferencvárosi TC.0190	In 1971 the stands were demolished and a new stadium was started to be built .
Ferencvárosi TC.0191	The new stadium was inaugurated on the 75th anniversary of the club .
Ferencvárosi TC.0192	On 19 May 1974 , the first match was played against the Vasas old boys .
Ferencvárosi TC.0193	The new stadium could host 29,505 spectators -LRB- including 10 771 seats and 18 734 standing -RRB- .
Ferencvárosi TC.0194	In the 1990s the stadium was redesigned to meet the UEFA requirements therefore its capacity was reduced to 18 100 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0195	On 21 December 2007 , the stadium was changed from Üllői úti Stadion to Stadion Albert Flórián .
Ferencvárosi TC.0196	Flórián Albert , the former Ferencváros icon , was present at the inauguration ceremony .
Ferencvárosi TC.0197	Sheffield United F.C. chairman Kevin McCabe 's Hungarian firm Esplanade Kft have agreed to buy Ferencváros 's real estate , including their stadium , for # 8.45 m .
Ferencvárosi TC.0198	They planned to redevelop the area and upgrade the stadium to meet FIFA and UEFA requirements .
Ferencvárosi TC.0199	-LSB- http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/football/teams/s/sheff_utd/7243262.stm] In 2012 Gábor Kubatov , the chairman of the club , announced that a new stadium is going to be built on the same location .
Ferencvárosi TC.0200	Honours * Hungarian League ** Winners -LRB- 28 -RRB- : 1903 , 1905 , 1907 , 1909 , 1910 , 1911 , 1912 , 1913 , 1926 , 1927 , 1928 , 1932 , 1934 , 1938 , 1940 , 1941 , 1949 , 1963 , 1964 , 1967 , 1968 , 1976 , 1981 , 1992 , 1995 , 1996 , 2001 , 2004 * Hungarian Cup ** Winners -LRB- 20 -RRB- : 1913 , 1922 , 1927 , 1928 , 1933 , 1935 , 1942 , 1943 , 1944 , 1958 , 1972 , 1974 , 1976 , 1978 , 1991 , 1993 , 1994 , 1995 , 2003 , 2004 * Hungarian Super Cup ** Winners -LRB- 4 -RRB- : 1993 , 1994 , 1995 , 2004 * Inter-Cities Fairs Cup ** Winners -LRB- 1 -RRB- : 1965 ** Runners-up -LRB- 1 -RRB- : 1968 * Mitropa Cup ** Winners -LRB- 2 -RRB- : 1928 , 1937 ** Runners-up -LRB- 4 -RRB- : 1935 , 1938 , 1939 , 1940 * European Cup Winners ' Cup ** Runners-up -LRB- 1 -RRB- : 1975 * Football Impact Cup ** Winner -LRB- 1 -RRB- : 2013 * More than any other Hungarian club Season results in Top League ; Notes * Note 1 : Ferencváros did not receive license from the Hungarian Football Federation governed by István Kisteleki , therefore the club was relegated to the Hungarian League 2 .
Ferencvárosi TC.0201	Other Notes * dnq = did not qualify Ferencvárosi TC in European competition Record by country of opposition * Correct as of 14 June 2011 P -- Played ; W -- Won ; D -- Drawn ; L -- Lost European Records * Highest stage reached in UEFA European Cup/UEFA Champions League : Quarter-finals -LRB- European Cup 1965-66 -RRB- * Biggest European home win : Ferencváros 9-1 Keflavík Football Club -LRB- European Cup 1965-66 -RRB- * Biggest European away win : CE Principat 1-8 Ferencváros -LRB- UEFA Cup 1998-99 -RRB- Managers * István Tóth-Potya -LRB- 1926 -- 30 -RRB- * Zoltán Blum -LRB- 1930 -- 37 -RRB- * Sándor Bródy -LRB- 1937 -RRB- * József Sándor -LRB- 1937 -RRB- * Emil Rauchmaul -LRB- 1937 -- 38 -RRB- * György Hlavay -LRB- 1938 -- 39 -RRB- * Lajos Dimény -LRB- 1939 -- 42 -RRB- * István Tóth-Potya -LRB- 1943 -RRB- * Alfréd Schaffer -LRB- 1943 -- 44 -RRB- * Pál Szabó -LRB- 1945 -RRB- * István Mike -LRB- 1940s -RRB- * Gábor Urbancsik -LRB- 1945 -- 46 -RRB- * Lajos Dimény -LRB- 1946 -- 47 -RRB- * Zoltán Opata -LRB- 1947 -RRB- * Antal Lyka -LRB- 1948 -- 50 -RRB- * Miklós Vadas -LRB- 1950 -RRB- * Gábor Urbancsik -LRB- 1951 -RRB- * Ferenc Deák -LRB- 1952 -RRB- * Károly Sós -LRB- 1953 -- 56 -RRB- * Árpád Csanádi -LRB- 1957 -RRB- * Sándor Tátrai -LRB- 1958 -- 61 -RRB- * József Mészáros -LRB- 1961 -- 65 -RRB- * Oszkár Vilezsál -LRB- 1965 -RRB- * Sándor Tátrai -LRB- 1966 -RRB- * Károly Lakat -LRB- 1967 -- 69 -RRB- * Géza Kalocsay -LRB- 1970 -RRB- * Jenő Dalnoki -LRB- 1970 -RRB- * Ferenc Csanádi -LRB- 1970 -- 73 -RRB- * Dezső Novák -LRB- 1973 -RRB- * Jenő Dalnoki -LRB- 1973 -- 78 -RRB- * Zoltán Friedmanszky -LRB- 1978 -- 80 -RRB- * Dezső Novák -LRB- 1980 -- 83 -RRB- * Géza Vincze -LRB- 1984 -- 85 -RRB- * Jenő Dalnoki -LRB- 1985 -- 87 -RRB- * Gyula Rákosi -LRB- 1987 -- 90 -RRB- * Tibor Nyilasi -LRB- 1990 -- 94 -RRB- * Dezső Novák -LRB- 1994 -- 96 -RRB- * József Mucha -LRB- interim -RRB- -LRB- 1996 -RRB- * Zoltán Varga -LRB- 1996 -- 97 -RRB- * Tibor Nyilasi -LRB- 1997 -- 98 -RRB- * Marijan Vlak -LRB- 1999 -RRB- * József Mucha -LRB- interim -RRB- -LRB- 1999 -RRB- * Stanko Poklepović -LRB- 1999-00 -RRB- * János Csank -LRB- 2000 -- 01 -RRB- * József Garami -LRB- July 2002 -- June 3 -RRB- * Attila Pintér -LRB- Dec 2003 -- July 4 -RRB- * Csaba László -LRB- July 2004 -- Nov 05 -RRB- * Imre Gellei -LRB- Nov 2005 -- April 7 -RRB- * Zoran Kuntic -LRB- April 2007 -- July 7 -RRB- * János Csank -LRB- July 2007 -- April 8 -RRB- * Bobby Davison -LRB- April 2008 -- Oct 09 -RRB- * Craig Short -LRB- Oct 2009 -- May 10 -RRB- * László Prukner -LRB- July 2010 -- Aug 11 -RRB- * Tamás Nagy -LRB- interim -RRB- -LRB- Aug 2011 -RRB- * Lajos Détári -LRB- Aug 2011 -- Aug 2012 -RRB- * Ricardo Moniz -LRB- Aug 2012 -- -RRB-
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0000	bytes = `` 8086 '' > North Rhine-Westphalia was established by the British military administration 's `` Operation Marriage '' on 23 August 1946 .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0001	Westphalia Early history Around 1 A.D. there were numerous incursions through Westphalia and perhaps even some permanent Roman or Romanized settlements .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0002	The Battle of Teutoburg Forest took place near Osnabrück -LRB- as mentioned , it is disputed whether this is in Westphalia -RRB- and some of the tribes who fought at this battle came from the area of Westphalia .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0003	Charlemagne is thought to have spent considerable time in Paderborn and nearby parts .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0004	His Saxon Wars also partly took place in what is thought of as Westphalia today .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0005	Popular legends link his adversary Widukind to places near Detmold , Bielefeld , Lemgo , Osnabrück and other places in Westphalia .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0006	Widukind was buried in Enger , which is also a subject of a legend .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0007	Along with Eastphalia and Engern , Westphalia -LRB- Westfalahi -RRB- was originally a district of the Duchy of Saxony .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0008	In 1180 Westphalia was elevated to the rank of a duchy by Emperor Barbarossa .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0009	The Duchy of Westphalia comprised only a small area south of the Lippe River .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0010	Middle Ages Parts of Westphalia came under Brandenburg-Prussian control during the 17th and 18th centuries , but most of it remained divided duchies and other feudal areas of power .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0011	The Peace of Westphalia of 1648 , signed in Münster and Osnabrück , ended the Thirty Years ' War .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0012	The concept of nation-state sovereignty resulting from the treaty became known as `` Westphalian sovereignty '' .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0013	Early modern era As a result of the Protestant Reformation , there is no dominant religion in Westphalia .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0014	Roman Catholicism and Lutheranism are on relatively equal footing .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0015	Lutheranism is strong in the eastern and northern parts with numerous free churches .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0016	Münster and especially Paderborn are thought of as Catholic .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0017	Osnabrück is divided almost equally between Catholicism and Protestantism .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0018	After the defeat of the Prussian Army at the Battle of Jena-Auerstedt , the Treaty of Tilsit in 1807 made the Westphalian territories part of the Kingdom of Westphalia from 1807 -- 13 .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0019	It was founded by Napoleon and was a French vassal state .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0020	This state only shared the name with the historical region ; it contained only a relatively small part of Westphalia , consisting instead mostly of Hessian and Eastphalian regions .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0021	After the Congress of Vienna , the Kingdom of Prussia received a large amount of territory in the Westphalian region and created the province of Westphalia in 1815 .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0022	The northernmost portions of the former kingdom , including the town of Osnabrück , had become part of the states of Hanover and Oldenburg .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0023	Rhineland Pre-Roman At the earliest historical period , the territories between the Ardennes and the Rhine were occupied by the Treveri , the Eburones and other Celtic tribes , who , however , were all more or less modified and influenced by their Germanic neighbours .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0024	On the right bank of the Rhine , between the Main and the Lahn , were the settlements of the Mattiaci , a branch of the Germanic Chatti , while farther to the north were the Usipetes and Tencteri .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0025	Roman and German conquests Julius Caesar conquered the tribes on the left bank , and Augustus established numerous fortified posts on the Rhine , but the Romans never succeeded in gaining a firm footing on the right bank .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0026	As the power of the Roman empire declined the Franks pushed forward along both banks of the Rhine , and by the end of the 5th century had conquered all the lands that had formerly been under Roman influence .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0027	The Germanic conquerors of the Rhenish districts were singularly little affected by the culture of the Roman provincials they subdued , and all traces of Roman civilization were submerged .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0028	By the 8th century the Frankish dominion was firmly established in western Germany and northern Gaul .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0029	On the division of the Carolingian Empire at the Treaty of Verdun the part of the province to the east of the river fell to East Francia , while that to the west remained with the kingdom of Lotharingia .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0030	Holy Roman Empire By the time of Otto I. -LRB- d. 973 -RRB- both banks of the Rhine had become part of the Holy Roman Empire , and the Rhenish territory was divided between the duchies of Upper Lorraine , on the Mosel , and Lower Lorraine on the Meuse .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0031	As the central power of the Holy Roman Emperor weakened , the Rhineland split up into numerous small independent principalities , each with its separate vicissitudes and special chronicles .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0032	The old Lotharingian divisions became obsolete , and the name of Lorraine became restricted to the district that still bears it .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0033	In spite of its dismembered condition , and the sufferings it underwent at the hands of its French neighbours in various periods of warfare , the Rhenish territory prospered greatly and stood in the foremost rank of German culture and progress .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0034	Aachen was the place of coronation of the German emperors , and the ecclesiastical principalities of the Rhine bulked largely in German history .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0035	Prussian influence Prussia first set foot on the Rhine in 1609 by the occupation of the Duchy of Cleves and about a century later Upper Guelders and Moers also became Prussian .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0036	At the peace of Basel in 1795 the whole of the left bank of the Rhine was resigned to France , and in 1806 the Rhenish princes all joined the Confederation of the Rhine .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0037	The congress of Vienna assigned the whole of the lower Rhenish districts to Prussia , which had the tact to leave them in undisturbed possession of the liberal institutions they had become accustomed to under the republican rule of the French .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0038	In 1920 , the Saar was separated from the Rhine Province and administered by the League of Nations until a plebiscite in 1935 , when the region was returned to the German Reich .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0039	At the same time , in 1920 , the districts of Eupen and Malmedy were transferred to Belgium -LRB- see German-Speaking Community of Belgium -RRB- .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0040	In 1946 , the Rhine Province was divided into the newly-founded states of Hesse , North Rhine-Westphalia and Rhineland-Palatinate .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0041	Creation of the state North Rhine-Westphalia was established by the British military administration 's `` Operation Marriage '' on 23 August 1946 .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0042	Originally , it consisted of Westphalia and the northern parts of the Rhine Province , both formerly part of Prussia .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0043	On 21 January 1947 , the former state of Lippe was merged with North Rhine-Westphalia .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0044	The constitution of North Rhine-Westphalia was then ratified through a referendum .
History of North Rhine-Westphalia.0045	Notes
North Rhine-Westphalia.0000	bytes = `` 42690 '' > North Rhine-Westphalia -LRB- -RRB- is the most populous state of Germany , with four of the country 's ten largest cities .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0001	The state was formed in 1946 as a merger of the northern Rhineland and Westphalia , both formerly parts of Prussia .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0002	Its capital is Düsseldorf ; the biggest city is Cologne .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0003	The state is currently run by a coalition of the Social Democrats -LRB- SPD -RRB- and Greens .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0004	History Westphalia Around 1 A.D. there were numerous incursions through Westphalia and perhaps even some permanent Roman or Romanized settlements .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0005	The Battle of Teutoburg Forest took place near Osnabrück -LRB- as mentioned , it is disputed whether this is in Westphalia -RRB- and some of the Germanic tribes who fought at this battle came from the area of Westphalia .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0006	Charlemagne is thought to have spent considerable time in Paderborn and nearby parts .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0007	His Saxon Wars also partly took place in what is thought of as Westphalia today .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0008	Popular legends link his adversary Widukind to places near Detmold , Bielefeld , Lemgo , Osnabrück and other places in Westphalia .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0009	Widukind was buried in Enger , which is also a subject of a legend .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0010	Along with Eastphalia and Engern , Westphalia -LRB- Westfalahi -RRB- was originally a district of the Duchy of Saxony .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0011	In 1180 Westphalia was elevated to the rank of a duchy by Emperor Barbarossa .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0012	The Duchy of Westphalia comprised only a small area south of the Lippe River .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0013	Parts of Westphalia came under Brandenburg-Prussian control during the 17th and 18th centuries , but most of it remained divided duchies and other feudal areas of power .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0014	The Peace of Westphalia of 1648 , signed in Münster and Osnabrück , ended the Thirty Years ' War .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0015	The concept of nation-state sovereignty resulting from the treaty became known as `` Westphalian sovereignty '' .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0016	As a result of the Protestant Reformation , there is no dominant religion in Westphalia .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0017	Roman Catholicism and Lutheranism are on relatively equal footing .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0018	Lutheranism is strong in the eastern and northern parts with numerous free churches .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0019	Münster and especially Paderborn are thought of as Catholic .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0020	Osnabrück is divided almost equally between Catholicism and Protestantism .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0021	After the defeat of the Prussian Army at the Battle of Jena-Auerstedt , the Treaty of Tilsit in 1807 made the Westphalian territories part of the Kingdom of Westphalia from 1807 -- 13 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0022	It was founded by Napoleon and was a French vassal state .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0023	This state only shared the name with the historical region ; it contained only a relatively small part of Westphalia , consisting instead mostly of Hessian and Eastphalian regions .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0024	After the Congress of Vienna , the Kingdom of Prussia received a large amount of territory in the Westphalian region and created the province of Westphalia in 1815 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0025	The northernmost portions of the former kingdom , including the town of Osnabrück , had become part of the states of Hanover and Oldenburg .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0026	Rhineland At the earliest historical period , the territories between the Ardennes and the Rhine were occupied by the Treveri , the Eburones and other Celtic tribes , who , however , were all more or less modified and influenced by their Germanic neighbours .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0027	On the right bank of the Rhine , between the Main and the Lahn , were the settlements of the Mattiaci , a branch of the Germanic Chatti , while farther to the north were the Usipetes and Tencteri .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0028	Julius Caesar conquered the tribes on the left bank , and Augustus established numerous fortified posts on the Rhine , but the Romans never succeeded in gaining a firm footing on the right bank .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0029	As the power of the Roman empire declined the Franks pushed forward along both banks of the Rhine , and by the end of the 5th century had conquered all the lands that had formerly been under Roman influence .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0030	The Germanic conquerors of the Rhenish districts were singularly little affected by the culture of the Roman provincials they subdued , and all traces of Roman civilization were submerged .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0031	By the 8th century the Frankish dominion was firmly established in western Germany and northern Gaul .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0032	On the division of the Carolingian Empire at the Treaty of Verdun the part of the province to the east of the river fell to East Francia , while that to the west remained with the kingdom of Lotharingia .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0033	By the time of Otto I. -LRB- d. 973 -RRB- both banks of the Rhine had become part of the Holy Roman Empire , and the Rhenish territory was divided between the duchies of Upper Lorraine , on the Mosel , and Lower Lorraine on the Meuse .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0034	As the central power of the Holy Roman Emperor weakened , the Rhineland split up into numerous small independent principalities , each with its separate vicissitudes and special chronicles .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0035	The old Lotharingian divisions became obsolete , and the name of Lorraine became restricted to the district that still bears it .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0036	In spite of its dismembered condition , and the sufferings it underwent at the hands of its French neighbours in various periods of warfare , the Rhenish territory prospered greatly and stood in the foremost rank of German culture and progress .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0037	Aachen was the place of coronation of the German emperors , and the ecclesiastical principalities of the Rhine bulked largely in German history .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0038	Prussia first set foot on the Rhine in 1609 by the occupation of the Duchy of Cleves and about a century later Upper Guelders and Moers also became Prussian .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0039	At the peace of Basel in 1795 the whole of the left bank of the Rhine was resigned to France , and in 1806 the Rhenish princes all joined the Confederation of the Rhine .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0040	After the Congress of Vienna , Prussia was awarded with the entire Rhineland , which included the Grand Duchy of Berg , the ecclesiastic electorates of Trier and Cologne , the free cities of Aachen and Cologne , and nearly a hundred small lordships and abbeys .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0041	The Prussian Rhine province was formed in 1822 and Prussia had the tact to leave them in undisturbed possession of the liberal institutions they had become accustomed to under the republican rule of the French .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0042	In 1920 , the districts of Eupen and Malmedy were transferred to Belgium -LRB- see German-Speaking Community of Belgium -RRB- .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0043	North Rhine-Westphalia Creation of the state The state of North Rhine-Westphalia was established by the British military administration 's `` Operation Marriage '' on 23 August 1946 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0044	Originally , it consisted of Westphalia and the northern parts of the Rhine Province , both formerly part of Prussia .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0045	On 21 January 1947 , the former state of Lippe was merged with North Rhine-Westphalia .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0046	The constitution of North Rhine-Westphalia was then ratified through a referendum .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0047	Geography North Rhine-Westphalia encompasses the plains of the Lower Rhine region and parts of the Central Uplands -LRB- die Mittelgebirge -RRB- up to the gorge of Porta Westfalica .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0048	The state covers an area of 34,083 km ² -LRB- 13,158 square miles -RRB- and shares borders with Belgium in the southwest and the Netherlands in the west and northwest .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0049	It has borders with the German states of Lower Saxony to the north and northeast , Rhineland-Palatinate to the south and Hesse to the southeast .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0050	Approximately half of the state is located in the relative low-lying terrain of the Westphalian Lowland and the Rhineland , both extending broadly into the North German Plain .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0051	A few isolated hill ranges are located within these lowlands , among them the Hohe Mark , the Beckum Hills , the Baumberge and the Stemmer Berge .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0052	The terrain rises towards the south and in the east of the state into parts of Germany 's Central Uplands .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0053	These hill ranges are the Weser Uplands - including the Egge Hills , the Wiehen Hills , the Wesergebirge and the Teutoburg Forest in the east , the Sauerland , the Bergisches Land , the Siegerland and the Siebengebirge in the south , as well as the left-Rhenish Eifel in the southwest of the state .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0054	The Rothaargebirge in the border region with Hesse rises to height of about 800 m above sea level .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0055	The highest of these mountains are the Langenberg , at 843.2 m above sea level , the Kahler Asten -LRB- 840.7 m -RRB- and the Clemensberg -LRB- 839.2 m -RRB- .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0056	The planimetrically-determined centre of North Rhine-Westphalia is located in the south of Dortmund-Aplerbeck in the Aplerbecker Mark -LRB- 51 ° 28 ' N , 7 ° 33 ' Ö -RRB- .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0057	Its westernmost point is situated near Selfkant close to the Dutch border , the easternmost near Höxter on the Weser .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0058	The southernmost point lies near Hellenthal in the Eifel region .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0059	The northernmost point is the NRW-Nordpunkt near Rahden in the northeast of the state .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0060	The Nordpunkt is located only 100 km to the south of the North Sea coast .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0061	The deepest natural dip is arranged in the district Zyfflich in the city of Kranenburg with 9.2 m above sea level in the northwest of the state .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0062	Though , the deepest point overground results from mining .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0063	The open-pit Hambach reaches at Niederzier a deep of 293 m below sea level .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0064	At the same time , this is the deepest man-made dip in Germany .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0065	The most important rivers flowing at least partially through North Rhine-Westphalia include : the Rhine , the Ruhr , the Ems , the Lippe , and the Weser .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0066	The Rhine is the by far most important river in North Rhine-Westphalia : it enters the state as Middle Rhine near Bad Honnef , where still being part of the Mittelrhein wine region .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0067	It changes into the Lower Rhine near Bad Godesberg and leaves North Rhine-Westphalia near Emmerich at a width of 730 metres .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0068	Almost immediately after entering the Netherlands , the Rhine splits into many branches .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0069	The Pader , which flows entirely within the city of Paderborn , is considered Germany 's shortest river .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0070	For many , North Rhine-Westphalia is synonymous with industrial areas and urban agglomerations .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0071	However , the largest part of the state is used for agriculture -LRB- almost 52 % -RRB- and forests -LRB- 25 % -RRB- .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0072	Subdivisions The state consists of five government regions -LRB- Regierungsbezirke -RRB- , divided into 31 districts -LRB- Kreise -RRB- and 23 urban districts -LRB- kreisfreie Städte -RRB- .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0073	In total , North Rhine-Westphalia has 396 municipalities -LRB- 1997 -RRB- , including the urban districts , which are municipalities by themselves .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0074	The five government regions of North Rhine-Westphalia each belong to one of the two Landschaftsverbände : Borders The state 's area covers a maximum distance of 291 km from north to south , and 266 km from east to west .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0075	The total length of the state 's borders is 1,645 km .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0076	The following countries and states have a border with North Rhine-Westphalia : * Belgium -LRB- 99 km -RRB- * Netherlands -LRB- 387 km -RRB- * Lower Saxony -LRB- 583 km -RRB- * Hesse -LRB- 269 km -RRB- * Rhineland-Palatinate -LRB- 307 km -RRB- Demographics North Rhine-Westphalia has a population of approximately 18 million inhabitants , and is centred around the polycentric Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan region , which includes the industrial Ruhr region and the Rhenish cities of Bonn , Cologne and Düsseldorf .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0077	30 of the 80 largest cities in Germany are located within North Rhine-Westphalia .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0078	The state 's capital is Düsseldorf , the state 's largest city is Cologne .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0079	The following table shows the ten largest cities of North Rhine-Westphalia : Religion According to studies of the Ruhr University Bochum 42.24 % of the North Rhine-Westphalian population adheres to the Roman Catholic Church , 28.35 % are members of the Evangelical Church in Germany , 23.76 % are unaffiliated , non-religious or atheists , 2.78 % are Muslims , 0.49 % are adherents of the Eastern Orthodox Church , 1.05 % are members of smaller Christian groups -LRB- half of them the New Apostolic Church -RRB- , 1.0 % are adherents of new religions or esoteric groups , 0.2 % are adherents of Dharmic religions , and 0.17 % are Jews .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0080	Politics The politics of North Rhine-Westphalia takes place within a framework of a federal parliamentary representative democratic republic .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0081	The two main parties , as on the federal level , the centre-right Christian Democratic Union and the centre-left Social Democratic Party .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0082	From 1966 to 2005 , North Rhine-Westphalia was continuously governed by the Social Democrats or SPD-led governments .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0083	The state 's legislative body is the Landtag -LRB- `` state diet '' -RRB- .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0084	It may pass laws within the competency of the state , e.g. cultural matters , the education system , matters of internal security , i.e. the police , building supervision , health supervision and the media ; as opposed to matters that are reserved to Federal law .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0085	North Rhine-Westphalia uses the same electoral system as the Federal level in Germany : `` Personalized proportional representation '' .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0086	Every five years the citizens of North Rhine-Westphalia vote in a general election to elect at least 181 members of the Landtag .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0087	Only parties who win at least 5 % of the votes cast may be represented in parliament .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0088	The Landtag , the parliamentary parties and groups consisting of at least 7 members of parliament have the right to table legal proposals to the Landtag for deliberation .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0089	The law that are passed by the Landtag is delivered to the Minister-President , who , together with the ministers involved , is required to sign it and announce it in the Law and Ordinance Gazette .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0090	List of Ministers-President These are the Ministers-president of the Federal State of North-Rhine Westphalia : For the current state government , see Cabinet Kraft II .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0091	Latest election results The results of the 2012 North Rhine-Westphalia state election were as follows .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0092	Voter turnout was at 59.6 % , a slight increase from the previous election in 2010 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0093	Culture The flag of North Rhine-Westphalia is green-white-red with the combined coats of arms of the Rhineland -LRB- white line before green background , symbolizing the river Rhine -RRB- , Westfalen -LRB- the white horse -RRB- and Lippe -LRB- the red rose -RRB- .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0094	According to legend the horse in the Westphalian coat of arms is the horse that the Saxon leader Widukind rode after his baptism .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0095	Other theories attribute the horse to Henry the Lion .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0096	Some connect it with the Germanic rulers Hengist and Horsa .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0097	Architecture and building monuments The state is not known for its castles like other regions in Germany .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0098	However , North Rhine-Westphalia has a high concentration of museums , cultural centres , concert halls and theatres .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0099	Historic monuments File : Löwenstein House Aachen -LRB- Germany -RRB- .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0100	jpg | Medieval architecture in Aachen File : Früh Brauhaus Köln - Am Hof 12 und 14 -LRB- 4626-28 -RRB- .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0101	jpg | Cölner Hofbräu Früh in Cologne File : Dortmund-alter-markt-reinoldikirche -LRB- mb -RRB- .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0102	jpg | Reinoldikirche and Alter Markt in Dortmund File : Muenster-100725-16053-Rathaus .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0103	jpg | Historical City Hall in Münster File : Alt Monschau - geo.hlipp.de - 6903 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0104	jpg | Timber framing in Monschau Modern architecture File : Zeche-Zollern 2138 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0105	JPG | Art Nouveau Zeche Zollern in Dortmund File :D üsseldorf , Medienhafen.jpg | Neuer Zollhof in Düsseldorf File : Krefeld haus lange gartenseite04 12 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0106	jpg | Haus Lange and Haus Esters in Krefeld File : Langen Foundation Neuss 02 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0107	jpg | Langen Foundation in Neuss File : Schwebebahnstation Zoo-Stadion 13 ies.jpg | Schwebebahn in Wuppertal World Heritage Sites The state has Aachen Cathedral , the Cologne Cathedral , the Zeche Zollverein in Essen and Augustusburg Palace in Brühl which are all World Heritage Sites .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0108	File : Schloss Augustusburg Bruehl.jpg | Augustusburg and Falkenlust File : Aachen Cathedral North View at Evening.jpg | Aachen Cathedral File : Kdom.jpg | Cologne Cathedral File : Zollverein Schacht 12 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0109	jpg | Zollverein Coal Mine Cuisine Food Drinks * Alt is a local beer speciality brewed in Düsseldorf and the Lower Rhine Region .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0110	* Kölsch is a local beer speciality brewed in Cologne .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0111	* Dortmunder Export is a local pale lager beer speciality brewed in Dortmund .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0112	Festivals North Rhine-Westphalia hosts film festivals in Cologne , Bonn , Dortmund , Duisburg , Münster , Oberhausen and Lünen .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0113	Other large Festivals include Renish carnivals , Ruhrtriennale .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0114	Every year GamesCom is hosted in Cologne .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0115	It is the largest video game convention in the world .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0116	Music * A regional anthem is the Lied für NRW -LRB- Song for NRW -RRB- .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0117	* North Rhine-Westphalia is home to many of Germany 's best-known heavy metal , speed metal and thrash metal bands : Accept , Angel Dust , Blind Guardian , Doro -LRB- formerly of Warlock -RRB- , Grave Digger , Holy Moses , Kreator , Rage , Scanner and Sodom .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0118	Economy In the 1950s and 1960s , Westphalia was known as Land von Kohle und Stahl or the land of coal and steel .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0119	In the post-WWII recovery , the Ruhr was one of the most important industrial regions in Europe , and contributed to the German Wirtschaftswunder .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0120	As of the late 1960s , repeated crises led to contractions of these industrial branches .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0121	On the other hand , producing sectors , particularly in mechanical engineering and metal and iron working industry , experienced substantial growth .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0122	Despite this structural change and an economic growth which was under national average , the 2007 GDP of 529.4 billion euro -LRB- 21.8 percent of the total German GDP -RRB- made the land the economically most important in Germany , as well as one of the most important economical areas in the world .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0123	Of Germany 's top 100 corporations , 37 are based in North Rhine-Westphalia .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0124	On a per capita base , however , Northrhine-Westphalia remains one of the weaker among the Western German states .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0125	As of November 2010 , the unemployment rate is 8.1 % , second highest among all western German states .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0126	North Rhine-Westphalia attracts companies from both Germany and abroad .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0127	In 2009 , the state had the most foreign direct investments -LRB- FDI -RRB- anywhere in Germany .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0128	Around 13,100 foreign companies from the most important investment countries control their German or European operations from bases in North Rhine-Westphalia .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0129	There has been many changes in the state 's economy in recent times .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0130	Among the many changes in the economy , employment in the creative industries is up while the mining sector is employing fewer people .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0131	Industrial heritage sites are now workplaces for designers , artists and the advertising industry .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0132	The Ruhr region , formerly known as the `` land of coal and steel '' -LRB- Land von Kohle und Stahl -RRB- , has -- since the 1960s -- undergone a significant structural change away from coal mining and steel industry .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0133	Many rural parts of Eastern Westphalia , Bergisches Land and the Lower Rhine ground their economy on `` Hidden Champions '' in various sectors .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0134	Education RWTH Aachen is one of Germany 's leading universities of technology and was chosen by DFG as one of the German Universities of Excellence in 2007 and again in 2012 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0135	North Rhine-Westphalia is home to 14 universities and over 50 partly postgraduate colleges , with a total of over 500,000 students .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0136	Largest and oldest university is the University of Cologne -LRB- Universität zu Köln -RRB- , originally founded in 1388 AD , since 2012 also one of Germany 's eleven Universities of Excellence .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0137	Sports Football North Rhine-Westphalia is home to several football clubs including current German champions Borussia Dortmund , as well as , Bayer 04 Leverkusen , 1 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0138	FC Köln , Borussia Mönchengladbach , FC Schalke 04 , MSV Duisburg , VfL Bochum , Arminia Bielefeld , Alemannia Aachen , Fortuna Düsseldorf , Wuppertaler SV and SC Paderborn 07 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0139	North Rhine-Westphalia have hosted several matches in the 1974 and 2006 FIFA World Cups and hosted matches in the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0140	Matches were played at Rheinstadion in Düsseldorf for the 1974 FIFA World Cup , RheinEnergieStadion in Cologne for the 2006 FIFA World Cup , Parkstadion in 1974 and Signal Iduna Park in Dortmund2006 .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0141	Borussia-Park in Mönchengladbach , BayArena in Leverkusen and Ruhrstadion in Bochum hosted matches for the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup .
North Rhine-Westphalia.0142	Hockey North Rhine-Westphalia is home to DEL teams Kölner Haie -LRB- Cologne Sharks -RRB- , Krefeld Pinguine -LRB- Krefeld Penguins -RRB- , DEG Metro Stars and Iserlohn Roosters .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0000	bytes = `` 59254 '' > Homosexual behavior in animals refers to the documented evidence of homosexual and bisexual behavior in various -LRB- non-human -RRB- species .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0001	Such behaviors include sex , courtship , affection , pair bonding , and parenting among same-sex animal pairings .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0002	Homosexual behavior has been observed in close to 1,500 species , ranging from primates to gut worms , and is well documented for 500 of them .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0003	Animal sexual behaviour takes many different forms , even within the same species .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0004	The motivations for and implications of these behaviors have yet to be fully understood , since most species have yet to be fully studied .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0005	According to Bagemihl , `` the animal kingdom -LSB- does -RSB- it with much greater sexual diversity -- including homosexual , bisexual and nonreproductive sex -- than the scientific community and society at large have previously been willing to accept . ''
Homosexual behavior in animals.0006	Current research indicates that various forms of same-sex sexual behavior are found throughout the animal kingdom .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0007	A new review made in 2009 of existing research showed that same-sex behavior is a nearly universal phenomenon in the animal kingdom , common across species .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0008	Homosexual behavior is best known from social species .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0009	According to geneticist Simon Levay in 1996 , `` Although homosexual behavior is very common in the animal world , it seems to be very uncommon that individual animals have a long-lasting predisposition to engage in such behavior to the exclusion of heterosexual activities .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0010	Thus , a homosexual orientation , if one can speak of such thing in animals , seems to be a rarity .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0011	One species in which exclusive homosexual orientation occurs , however , is that of domesticated sheep -LRB- Ovis aries -RRB- .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0012	`` About 10 % of rams -LRB- males -RRB- refuse to mate with ewes -LRB- females -RRB- but do readily mate with other rams . ''
Homosexual behavior in animals.0013	The observation of homosexual behavior in animals can be seen as both an argument for and against the acceptance of homosexuality in humans , and has been used especially against the claim that it is a peccatum contra naturam -LRB- ` sin against nature ' -RRB- .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0014	For instance , homosexuality in animals was cited in the United States Supreme Court 's decision in Lawrence v. Texas which struck down the sodomy laws of 14 states .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0015	Applying the term homosexual to animals The term homosexual was coined by Karl-Maria Kertbeny in 1868 to describe same-sex sexual attraction and sexual behavior in humans .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0016	Its use in animal studies has been controversial for two main reasons : animal sexuality and motivating factors have been and remain poorly understood , and the term has strong cultural implications in western society that are irrelevant for species other than humans .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0017	Thus homosexual behavior has been given a number of terms over the years .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0018	When describing animals , the term homosexual is preferred over gay , lesbian , and other terms currently in use , as these are seen as even more bound to human homosexuality .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0019	Animal preference and motivation is always inferred from behavior .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0020	In wild animals , researchers will as a rule not be able to map the entire life of an individual , and must infer from frequency of single observations of behavior .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0021	The correct usage of the term homosexual is that an animal exhibits homosexual behavior or even same-sex sexual behavior ; however , this article conforms to the usage by modern research , applying the term homosexuality to all sexual behavior -LRB- copulation , genital stimulation , mating games and sexual display behavior -RRB- between animals of the same sex .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0022	In most instances , it is presumed that the homosexual behavior is but part of the animal 's overall sexual behavioral repertoire , making the animal `` bisexual '' rather than `` homosexual '' as the terms are commonly understood in humans , but cases of homosexual preference and exclusive homosexual pairs are known .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0023	Research A majority of the research available concerning homosexual behavior in animals , lacks specification between animals that exclusively exhibit same-sex tendencies and those that participate in heterosexual and homosexual mating activities interchangeably .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0024	This lack of distinction has led to differing opinions and conflicting interpretations of collected data amongst scientists and researchers .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0025	For instance , Dr. Bruce Bagemihl , author of the book Biological Exuberence : Animal Homosexuality and Natural Diversity , emphasizes that there is no anatomical or endocrinological differences between exclusively homosexual and exclusively heterosexual animal pairs .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0026	However , if the definition of `` homosexual behavior '' is made to include animals that participate in both same-sex and opposite-sex mating activities , hormonal differences have been documented among key sex hormones , such as testosterone and estradiol , when compared to those who participate solely in heterosexual mating .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0027	Many of the animals used in studies of homosexuality do not appear to spontaneously exhibit these tendencies often in the wild .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0028	Such behavior is often elicited and exaggerated by the researcher during experimentation through the destruction of a portion of brain tissue , or by exposing the animal to high levels of steroid hormones prenatally .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0029	Information gathered from these studies is limited when applied to spontaneously occurring same-sex behavior in animals outside of the laboratory .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0030	The presence of same-sex sexual behavior was not ` officially ' observed on a large scale until recent times , possibly due to observer bias caused by social attitudes to same-sex sexual behavior , innocent confusion , or even from a fear of `` being ridiculed by their colleagues . ''
Homosexual behavior in animals.0031	Georgetown University biologist Janet Mann states `` Scientists who study the topic are often accused of trying to forward an agenda , and their work can come under greater scrutiny than that of their colleagues who study other topics . ''
Homosexual behavior in animals.0032	They also noted `` Not every sexual act has a reproductive function ... that 's true of humans and non-humans . ''
Homosexual behavior in animals.0033	It appears to be widespread amongst social birds and mammals , particularly the sea mammals and the primates .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0034	The true extent of homosexuality in animals is not known .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0035	While studies have demonstrated homosexual behavior in a number of species , Petter Bøckman , the scientific advisor of the exhibition Against Nature ?
Homosexual behavior in animals.0036	in 2007 , speculated that the true extent of the phenomenon may be much larger than was then recognized : No species has been found in which homosexual behaviour has not been shown to exist , with the exception of species that never have sex at all , such as sea urchins and aphis .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0037	Moreover , a part of the animal kingdom is hermaphroditic , truly bisexual .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0038	For them , homosexuality is not an issue .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0039	An example of overlooking homosexual behavior is noted by Bruce Bagemihl describing mating giraffes where nine out of ten pairings occur between males .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0040	Every male that sniffed a female was reported as sex , while anal intercourse with orgasm between males was only `` revolving around '' dominance , competition or greetings .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0041	Some researchers believe this behavior to have its origin in male social organization and social dominance , similar to the dominance traits shown in prison sexuality .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0042	Others , particularly Joan Roughgarden , Bruce Bagemihl , Thierry Lodé and Paul Vasey suggest the social function of sex -LRB- both homosexual and heterosexual -RRB- is not necessarily connected to dominance , but serves to strengthen alliances and social ties within a flock .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0043	Others have argued that social organization theory is inadequate because it can not account for some homosexual behaviors , for example , penguin species where same-sex individuals mate for life and refuse to pair with females when given the chance .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0044	While reports on many such mating scenarios are still only anecdotal , a growing body of scientific work confirms that permanent homosexuality occurs not only in species with permanent pair bonds , but also in non-monogamous species like sheep .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0045	One report on sheep cited below states : Approximately 8 % of rams exhibit sexual preferences -LSB- that is , even when given a choice -RSB- for male partners -LRB- male-oriented rams -RRB- in contrast to most rams , which prefer female partners -LRB- female-oriented rams -RRB- .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0046	We identified a cell group within the medial preoptic area/anterior hypothalamus of age-matched adult sheep that was significantly larger in adult rams than in ewes ... In fact , apparent homosexual individuals are known from all of the traditional domestic species , from sheep , cattle and horses to cats , dogs and budgerigars .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0047	Physiological basis A definite physiological explanation or reason for homosexual activity in animal species has not been agreed upon by researchers in the field .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0048	Numerous scholars are of the opinion that varying levels -LRB- either higher or lower -RRB- of the sex hormones in the animal , in addition to the size of the animal 's gonads , play a direct role in the sexual behavior and preference exhibited by that animal .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0049	Others firmly argue no evidence to support these claims exists when comparing animals of a specific species exhibiting homosexual behavior exclusively and those that do n't .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0050	Ultimately , empirical support from comprehensive endocrinological studies exist for both interpretations .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0051	Researchers found no evidence of differences in the measurements of the gonads , or the levels of the sex hormones of exclusively homosexual western gulls and ring-billed gulls .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0052	However , when analyzing these differences in bisexual rams , males were found to have lower levels of testosterone and estradiol in their blood , as well as smaller gonads than their heterosexual counterpart .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0053	Additional studies pertaining to hormone involvement in homosexual behavior indicate that when administering treatments of testosterone and estradiol to female heterosexual animals , the elevated hormone levels increase the likelihood of homosexual behavior .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0054	Additionally , boosting the levels of sex hormones during an animal 's pregnancy appears to increase the likelihood of it birthing a homosexual offspring .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0055	Genetic basis Researchers found that disabling the -LSB- http://www.wikigenes.org/e/gene/e/945842.html fucose mutarotase -RSB- -LRB- FucM -RRB- gene in laboratory mice -- which influences the levels of estrogen to which the brain is exposed -- caused the female mice to behave as if they were male as they grew up .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0056	`` The mutant female mouse underwent a slightly altered developmental programme in the brain to resemble the male brain in terms of sexual preference '' said Professor Chankyu Park of the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in Daejon , South Korea , who led the research .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0057	His most recent findings have been published in the BMC Genetics journal on July 7 , 2010 .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0058	Another study found that by manipulating a gene in fruit flies -LRB- Drosophila -RRB- , homosexual behavior appeared to have been induced .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0059	However , in addition to homosexual behavior , several abnormal behaviors were also exhibited apparently due to this mutation .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0060	Neurobiological basis In March 2011 , research shows that serotonin is involved in the mechanism of sexual orientation of mice .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0061	A study conducted on fruit flies found that inhibiting the dopamine neurotransmitter inhibited lab-induced homosexual behavior .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0062	Some selected species and groups Birds Black swans An estimated one-quarter of all black swans pairings are of homosexual males .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0063	They steal nests , or form temporary threesomes with females to obtain eggs , driving away the female after she lays the eggs .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0064	More of their cygnets survive to adulthood than those of different-sex pairs , possibly due to their superior ability to defend large portions of land .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0065	The same reasoning has been applied to male flamingo pairs raising chicks .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0066	Gulls Studies have shown that 10 to 15 percent of female western gulls in some populations in the wild exhibit homosexual behavior .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0067	Ibises Research has shown that the environmental pollutant methylmercury can increase the prevalence of homosexual behavior in male American White Ibis .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0068	The study involved exposing chicks in varying dosages to the chemical and measuring the degree of homosexual behavior in adulthood .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0069	The results discovered was that as the dosage was increased the likelihood of homosexual behavior also increased .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0070	The endocrine blocking feature of mercury has been suggested as a possible cause of sexual disruption in other bird species .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0071	Mallards Mallards form male-female pairs only until the female lays eggs , at which time the male leaves the female .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0072	Mallards have rates of male-male sexual activity that are unusually high for birds , in some cases , as high as 19 % of all pairs in a population .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0073	Penguins Penguins have been observed to engage in homosexual behaviour since at least as early as 1911 .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0074	George Murray Levick , who documented this behaviour in Adélie Penguins at Cape Adare , described it as `` depraved '' .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0075	The report was considered too shocking for public release at the time , and was suppressed .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0076	The only copies that were made available privately to researchers were translated into Greek , to prevent this knowledge becoming more widely known .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0077	The report was unearthed only a century later , and published in Polar Record in June 2012 .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0078	In early February 2004 the New York Times reported that Roy and Silo , a male pair of chinstrap penguins in the Central Park Zoo in New York City had successfully hatched and fostered a female chick from a fertile egg they had been given to incubate .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0079	Other penguins in New York zoos have also been reported to have formed same-sex pairs .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0080	Zoos in Japan and Germany have also documented homosexual male penguin couples .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0081	The couples have been shown to build nests together and use a stone as a substitute for an egg .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0082	Researchers at Rikkyo University in Tokyo found 20 homosexual pairs at 16 major aquariums and zoos in Japan .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0083	The Bremerhaven Zoo in Germany attempted to encourage reproduction of endangered Humbolt penguins by importing females from Sweden and separating three male pairs , but this was unsuccessful .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0084	The zoo 's director said that the relationships were `` too strong '' between the homosexual pairs .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0085	German gay groups protested at this attempt to break up the male-male pairs but the zoo 's director was reported as saying `` We do n't know whether the three male pairs are really homosexual or whether they have just bonded because of a shortage of females ... nobody here wants to forcibly separate homosexual couples . ''
Homosexual behavior in animals.0086	A pair of male Magellanic penguins who had shared a burrow for six years at the San Francisco Zoo and raised a surrogate chick , split when the male of a pair in the next burrow died and the female sought a new mate .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0087	Buddy and Pedro , a pair of male African Penguins , were separated by the Toronto Zoo to mate with female penguins .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0088	Buddy has since paired off with a female .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0089	Vultures In 1998 two male Griffon vultures named Dashik and Yehuda , at the Jerusalem Biblical Zoo , engaged in `` open and energetic sex '' and built a nest .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0090	The keepers provided the couple with an artificial egg , which the two parents took turns incubating ; and 45 days later , the zoo replaced the egg with a baby vulture .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0091	The two male vultures raised the chick together .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0092	A few years later , however , Yehuda became interested in a female vulture that was brought into the aviary .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0093	Dashik became depressed , and was eventually moved to the zoological research garden at Tel Aviv University where he too set up a nest with a female vulture .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0094	Two homosexual male vultures at the Allwetter Zoo in Muenster built a nest together , although they were picked on and often had their nest materials stolen by other vultures .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0095	They were eventually separated to try to promote breeding by placing one of them with female vultures , despite the protests of German homosexual groups .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0096	Pigeons Both male and female pigeons sometimes exhibit homosexual behavior .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0097	In addition to sexual behavior , same-sex pigeon pairs will build nests , and hens will lay -LRB- infertile -RRB- eggs and attempt to incubate them .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0098	Mammals Amazon Dolphin The Amazon River dolphin or boto has been reported to form up in bands of 3 -- 5 individuals enjoying group sex .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0099	The groups usually comprise young males and sometimes one or two females .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0100	Sex is often performed in non-reproductive ways , using snout , flippers and genital rubbing , without regards to gender .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0101	In captivity , they have been observed to sometimes perform homosexual and heterosexual penetration of the blowhole , a hole homologous with the nostril of other mammals , making this the only known example of nasal sex in the animal kingdom .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0102	The males will sometimes also perform sex with males from the tucuxi species , a type of small porpoise .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0103	American Bison Courtship , mounting , and full anal penetration between bulls has been noted to occur among American Bison .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0104	The Mandan nation Okipa festival concludes with a ceremonial enactment of this behavior , to `` ensure the return of the buffalo in the coming season . ''
Homosexual behavior in animals.0105	Also , mounting of one female by another is common among cattle .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0106	Bonobo and other apes The Bonobo , which has a matriarchal society , unusual amongst apes , is a fully bisexual species -- both males and females engage in heterosexual and homosexual behavior , being noted for female-female homosexuality in particular .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0107	Roughly 60 % of all bonobo sexual activity occurs between two or more females .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0108	While the homosexual bonding system in Bonobos represents the highest frequency of homosexuality known in any species , homosexuality has been reported for all great apes -LRB- a group which includes humans -RRB- , as well as a number of other primate species .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0109	Dutch primatologist Frans de Waal on observing and filming bonobos noted that there were two reasons to believe sexual activity is the bonobo 's answer to avoiding conflict .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0110	Anything that arouses the interest of more than one bonobo at a time , not just food , tends to result in sexual contact .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0111	If two bonobos approach a cardboard box thrown into their enclosure , they will briefly mount each other before playing with the box .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0112	Such situations lead to squabbles in most other species .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0113	But bonobos are quite tolerant , perhaps because they use sex to divert attention and to defuse tension .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0114	Bonobo sex often occurs in aggressive contexts totally unrelated to food .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0115	A jealous male might chase another away from a female , after which the two males reunite and engage in scrotal rubbing .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0116	Or after a female hits a juvenile , the latter 's mother may lunge at the aggressor , an action that is immediately followed by genital rubbing between the two adults .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0117	Bottlenose dolphins Dolphins of several species engage in homosexual acts , though it is best studied in the bottlenose dolphins .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0118	Sexual encounters between females take the shape of `` beak-genital propulsion '' , where one female inserts her beak in the genital opening of the other while swimming gently forward .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0119	Between males , homosexual behaviour includes rubbing of genitals against each other , which sometimes leads to the males swimming belly to belly , inserting the penis in the others genital slit and sometimes anus .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0120	Janet Mann , Georgetown University professor of biology and psychology , argues that the strong personal behavior among male dolphin calves is about bond formation and benefits the species in an evolutionary context .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0121	She cites studies showing that these dolphins later in life as adults are in a sense bisexual , and the male bonds forged earlier in life work together for protection as well as locating females to reproduce with .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0122	Confrontations between flocks of bottlenose dolphins and the related species Atlantic spotted dolphin will sometimes lead to cross-species homosexual behaviour between the males rather than combat .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0123	Elephants African and Asian males will engage in same-sex bonding and mounting .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0124	Such encounters are often associated with affectionate interactions , such as kissing , trunk intertwining , and placing trunks in each other 's mouths .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0125	Male elephants , who often live apart from the general herd , often form `` companionships '' , consisting of an older individual and one or sometimes two younger , attendant males with sexual behavior being an important part of the social dynamic .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0126	Unlike heterosexual relations , which are always of a fleeting nature , the relationships between males may last for years .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0127	The encounters are analogous to heterosexual bouts , one male often extending his trunk along the other 's back and pushing forward with his tusks to signify his intention to mount .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0128	Same-sex relations are common and frequent in both sexes , with Asiatic elephants in captivity devoting roughly 45 % of sexual encounters to same-sex activity .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0129	Giraffes Male giraffes have been observed to engage in remarkably high frequencies of homosexual behavior .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0130	After aggressive `` necking '' , it is common for two male giraffes to caress and court each other , leading up to mounting and climax .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0131	Such interactions between males have been found to be more frequent than heterosexual coupling .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0132	In one study , up to 94 % of observed mounting incidents took place between two males .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0133	The proportion of same sex activities varied between 30 and 75 % , and at any given time one in twenty males were engaged in non-combative necking behavior with another male .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0134	Only 1 % of same-sex mounting incidents occurred between females .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0135	Monkeys Among monkeys , Lionel Tiger and Robin Fox conducted a study on how Depo-Provera contraceptives lead to decreased male attraction to females .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0136	Japanese macaque With the Japanese macaque , also known as the `` snow monkey '' , same-sex relations are frequent , though rates vary between troops .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0137	Females will form `` consortships '' characterized by affectionate social and sexual activities .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0138	In some troops up to one quarter of the females form such bonds , which vary in duration from a few days to a few weeks .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0139	Often , strong and lasting friendships result from such pairings .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0140	Males also have same-sex relations , typically with multiple partners of the same age .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0141	Affectionate and playful activities are associated with such relations .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0142	Lions Both male and female lions have been seen to interact homosexually .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0143	Male lions pair-bond for a number of days and initiate homosexual activity with affectionate nuzzling and caressing , leading to mounting and thrusting .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0144	About 8 % of mountings have been observed to occur with other males .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0145	Pairings between females are held to be fairly common in captivity but have not been observed in the wild .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0146	Polecat European polecats Mustela putorius were found to engage homosexually with non-sibling animals .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0147	Exclusive homosexuality with mounting and anal penetration in this solitary species serves no apparent adaptive function .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0148	Sheep Ovis aries has attracted much attention due to the fact that some rams seem to have an exclusive homosexual orientation .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0149	An October 2003 study by Dr. Charles E. Roselli et al. -LRB- Oregon Health and Science University -RRB- states that homosexuality in male sheep -LRB- found in 8 % of rams -RRB- is associated with a region in the rams ' brains which the authors call the `` ovine Sexually Dimorphic Nucleus '' -LRB- oSDN -RRB- which is half the size of the corresponding region in heterosexual male sheep .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0150	Scientists found that , `` The oSDN in rams that preferred females was significantly larger and contained more neurons than in male-oriented rams and ewes .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0151	In addition , the oSDN of the female-oriented rams expressed higher levels of aromatase , a substance that converts testosterone to estradiol , a form of estrogen which is believed to facilitate typical male sexual behaviors .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0152	Aromatase expression was no different between male-oriented rams and ewes . ''
Homosexual behavior in animals.0153	`` The dense cluster of neurons that comprise the oSDN express cytochrome P450 aromatase .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0154	Aromatase mRNA levels in the oSDN were significantly greater in female-oriented rams than in ewes , whereas male-oriented rams exhibited intermediate levels of expression . ''
Homosexual behavior in animals.0155	These results suggest that '' ... naturally occurring variations in sexual partner preferences may be related to differences in brain anatomy and its capacity for estrogen synthesis . ''
Homosexual behavior in animals.0156	As noted before , given the potential unagressiveness of the male population in question , the differing aromatase levels may also have been evidence of aggression levels , not sexuality .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0157	It should also be noted that the results of this study have not been confirmed by other studies .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0158	The Merck Manual of Veterinary Medicine appears to consider homosexuality among sheep as a routine occurrence and an issue to be dealt with as a problem of animal husbandry .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0159	Spotted Hyena The family structure of the Spotted Hyena is matriarchal , and dominance relationships with strong sexual elements are routinely observed between related females .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0160	Due largely to the female spotted hyena 's unique urogenital system , which looks more like a penis rather than a vagina , early naturalists thought hyenas were hermaphroditic males who commonly practiced homosexuality .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0161	Early writings such as Ovid 's Metamorphoses and the Physiologus suggested that the hyena continually changed its sex and nature from male to female and back again .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0162	In Paedagogus , Clement of Alexandria noted that the hyena -LRB- along with the hare -RRB- was `` quite obsessed with sexual intercourse . ''
Homosexual behavior in animals.0163	Many Europeans associated the hyena with sexual deformity , prostitution , deviant sexual behavior , and even witchcraft .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0164	The reality behind the confusing reports is the sexually aggressive behavior between the females , including mounting between females .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0165	Research has shown that `` in contrast to most other female mammals , female Crocuta are male-like in appearance , larger than males , and substantially more aggressive , '' and they have `` been masculinized without being defeminized . ''
Homosexual behavior in animals.0166	Study of this unique genitalia and aggressive behavior in the female hyena has led to the understanding that more aggressive females are better able to compete for resources , including food and mating partners .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0167	Research has shown that `` elevated levels of testosterone in utero '' contribute to extra aggressiveness ; both males and females mount members of both the same and opposite sex , who in turn are possibly acting more submissive because of lower levels of testosterone in utero .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0168	Others Lizards Whiptail lizard -LRB- Teiidae genus -RRB- females have the ability to reproduce through parthenogenesis and as such males are rare and sexual breeding non-standard .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0169	Females engage in sexual behavior to stimulate ovulation , with their behavior following their hormonal cycles ; during low levels of estrogen , these -LRB- female -RRB- lizards engage in `` masculine '' sexual roles .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0170	Those animals with currently high estrogen levels assume `` feminine '' sexual roles .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0171	Lizards that perform the courtship ritual have greater fertility than those kept in isolation due to an increase in hormones triggered by the sexual behaviors .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0172	So , even though asexual whiptail lizards populations lack males , sexual stimuli still increase reproductive success .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0173	From an evolutionary standpoint , these females are passing their full genetic code to all of their offspring -LRB- rather than the 50 % of genes that would be passed in sexual reproduction -RRB- .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0174	Certain species of gecko also reproduce by parthenogenesis .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0175	Insects Dragonflies Male homosexuality has been inferred in several species of dragonflies -LRB- the order Odonata -RRB- .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0176	The cloacal pinchers of male damselflies and dragonflies inflict characteristic head damage to females during sex .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0177	A survey of 11 species of damsel and dragonflies has revealed such mating damages in 20 to 80 % of the males too , indicating a fairly high occurrence of sexual coupling between males .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0178	Fruit flies Male Drosophila melanogaster flies bearing two copies of a mutant allele in the fruitless gene court and attempt to mate exclusively with other males .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0179	The genetic basis of animal homosexuality has been studied in the fly Drosophila melanogaster .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0180	Here , multiple genes have been identified that can cause homosexual courtship and mating .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0181	These genes are thought to control behavior through pheromones as well as altering the structure of the animal 's brains .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0182	These studies have also investigated the influence of environment on the likelihood of flies displaying homosexual behavior .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0183	Bed bugs Male bed bugs -LRB- Cimex lectularius -RRB- are sexually attracted to any newly fed individual and this results in homosexual mounting .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0184	This occurs in heterosexual mounting by the traumatic insemination in which the male pierces the female abdomen with his needle-like penis .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0185	In homosexual mating this risks abdominal injuries as males lack the female counteradaptive spermalege structure .
Homosexual behavior in animals.0186	Males produce alarm pheromones to reduce such homosexual matings .
Animal sexual behaviour.0000	bytes = `` 115864 '' > Animal sexual behaviour takes many different forms , even within the same species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0001	Among animals , researchers have observed monogamy , promiscuity , sex between species , sexual arousal from objects or places , sex apparently via duress or coercion , copulation with dead animals , homosexual , heterosexual , bisexual sexual behaviour , situational sexual behaviour , and a range of other practices .
Animal sexual behaviour.0002	When animal sexual behaviour is reproductively-driven , it is often termed mating or copulation ; for most non-human mammals , mating and copulation occur at the point of estrus -LRB- the most fertile period of time in the female 's reproductive cycle -RRB- , which increases the chances of successful impregnation .
Animal sexual behaviour.0003	However , the study of animal sexuality -LRB- especially that of primates -RRB- is a rapidly developing field .
Animal sexual behaviour.0004	While it used to be believed that only humans and a handful of other species performed sexual acts other than for reproduction , and that animals ' sexuality was instinctive and a simple response to the `` right '' stimulation -LRB- sight , scent -RRB- , current understanding is that many species that were formerly believed to be monogamous are promiscuous or opportunistic in nature ; a wide range of species appear both to masturbate and to use objects as tools to help them do so ; in many species , animals try to give and get sexual stimulation with others where reproduction is not the focus , and homosexual behaviour has been observed among 1,500 species , with 500 of those being well-documented .
Animal sexual behaviour.0005	Animal sexual behaviour involves struggle between many males .
Animal sexual behaviour.0006	Female animals select males only if they are strong and able to protect themselves or not .
Animal sexual behaviour.0007	For example , if a male animal fights against another male animal of the same species , then the animal that wins the fight will have the chance to mate with the higher number of females and also he will pass on his genes to his offspring , who pass on their genes to the next offspring in line .
Animal sexual behaviour.0008	Mating systems General In sociobiology and behavioural ecology , the term mating system is used to describe the ways in which animal societies are structured in relation to sexual behaviour .
Animal sexual behaviour.0009	The mating system specifies which males mate with which females , and under what circumstances .
Animal sexual behaviour.0010	The following are some of the mating systems generally recognised in humans and other animals : * Monogamy : Two individuals have an exclusive mating relationship .
Animal sexual behaviour.0011	* Polygamy : A single individual concurrently carries relationship/mates with one or more of the opposite sex .
Animal sexual behaviour.0012	Three types are recognized : ** Polygyny -LRB- the most common polygamous mating system in vertebrates so far studied -RRB- : One male has an exclusive relationship with two or more females .
Animal sexual behaviour.0013	** Polyandry : One female has an exclusive relationship with two or more males .
Animal sexual behaviour.0014	** Polygynandry : Two or more individuals have an exclusive relationship with two or more individuals from the opposite sex ; the numbers of males and females need not be equal , and in vertebrate species studied so far , there are usually fewer males .
Animal sexual behaviour.0015	* Promiscuity : Any male and female will mate within the social group .
Animal sexual behaviour.0016	Monogamy Zoologists and biologists now have solid evidence that monogamous pairs of animals are not always sexually exclusive .
Animal sexual behaviour.0017	Many animals that form pairs to mate and raise offspring regularly engage in sexual activities with extra-pair partners .
Animal sexual behaviour.0018	This includes previous examples , such as swans .
Animal sexual behaviour.0019	Sometimes , these extra-pair sexual activities lead to offspring .
Animal sexual behaviour.0020	Genetic tests frequently show that some of the offspring raised by a monogamous pair come from the female mating with an extra-pair male partner .
Animal sexual behaviour.0021	These discoveries have led biologists to adopt new ways of talking about monogamy : Whatever makes a pair of animals socially monogamous does not necessarily make them sexually or genetically monogamous .
Animal sexual behaviour.0022	Social monogamy , sexual monogamy , and genetic monogamy can occur in different combinations .
Animal sexual behaviour.0023	Social monogamy is relatively rare in the animal kingdom .
Animal sexual behaviour.0024	The actual incidence of social monogamy varies greatly across different branches of the evolutionary tree .
Animal sexual behaviour.0025	Over 90 % of avian species are socially monogamous .
Animal sexual behaviour.0026	This stands in contrast to mammals .
Animal sexual behaviour.0027	Only 3 % of mammalian species are socially monogamous , although up to 15 % of primate species are .
Animal sexual behaviour.0028	Social monogamy has also been observed in reptiles , fish , and insects .
Animal sexual behaviour.0029	Sexual monogamy is also rare among animals .
Animal sexual behaviour.0030	Many socially monogamous species engage in extra-pair copulations , making them sexually non-monogamous .
Animal sexual behaviour.0031	For example , while over 90 % of birds are socially monogamous , `` on average , 30 % or more of the baby birds in any nest -LSB- are -RSB- sired by someone other than the resident male . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0032	Patricia Adair Gowaty has estimated that , out of 180 different species of socially monogamous songbirds , only 10 % are sexually monogamous .
Animal sexual behaviour.0033	The incidence of genetic monogamy , determined by DNA fingerprinting , varies widely across species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0034	For a few rare species , the incidence of genetic monogamy is 100 % , with all offspring genetically related to the socially monogamous pair .
Animal sexual behaviour.0035	But genetic monogamy is strikingly low in other species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0036	Barash and Lipton note : Such low levels of genetic monogamy have surprised biologists and zoologists , forcing them to rethink the role of social monogamy in evolution .
Animal sexual behaviour.0037	They can no longer assume social monogamy determines how genes are distributed in a species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0038	The lower the rates of genetic monogamy among socially monogamous pairs , the less of a role social monogamy plays in determining how genes are distributed among offspring .
Animal sexual behaviour.0039	Polygamy and polygyny Polygamy is defined as a mating structure in which a single individual of one sex has exclusive access to several individuals of the opposite sex .
Animal sexual behaviour.0040	It takes two main forms -- polygyny and polyandry .
Animal sexual behaviour.0041	As polygyny is the most common form of polygamy among vertebrates -LRB- including humans , to some extent -RRB- , it has been studied far more extensively than polyandry .
Animal sexual behaviour.0042	In some species , notably those with harem-like structures , only one of a few males in a group of females will mate .
Animal sexual behaviour.0043	Technically , polygyny in sociobiology and zoology is defined as a system in which a male has a relationship with more than one female , but the females are predominantly bonded to a single male .
Animal sexual behaviour.0044	Should the active male be driven out , killed , or otherwise removed from the group , in a number of species the new male will ensure that breeding resources are not wasted on another male 's young .
Animal sexual behaviour.0045	The new male may achieve this in many different ways , including : * Competitive infanticide in lions , hippopotamuses , and some monkeys , the new male will kill the offspring of the previous alpha male to cause their mothers to become receptive to his sexual advances since they are no longer nursing .
Animal sexual behaviour.0046	* Harassment to miscarriage amongst wild horses and baboons , the male will `` systematically harass '' pregnant females until they miscarry .
Animal sexual behaviour.0047	* Pheromone based spontaneous abortion in some rodents such as mice , a new male with a different scent will cause females who are pregnant to spontaneously fail to implant recently fertilized eggs .
Animal sexual behaviour.0048	This does not require contact ; it is mediated by scent alone .
Animal sexual behaviour.0049	It is known as the Bruce-Parkes effect .
Animal sexual behaviour.0050	Von Haartman specifically described the mating behaviour of the European pied flycatcher as successive polygyny .
Animal sexual behaviour.0051	Within this system , the males leave their home territory once their primary female lays her first egg .
Animal sexual behaviour.0052	Males then create a second territory , presumably in order to attract a secondary female to breed .
Animal sexual behaviour.0053	Even when they succeed at acquiring a second mate , the males typically return to the first female to exclusively provide for her and her offspring .
Animal sexual behaviour.0054	Promiscuity Two examples of systems in primates are promiscuous mating chimpanzees and bonobos .
Animal sexual behaviour.0055	These species live in social groups consisting of several males and several females .
Animal sexual behaviour.0056	Each female copulates with many males , and vice versa .
Animal sexual behaviour.0057	In bonobos , the amount of promiscuity is particularly striking because bonobos use sex to alleviate social conflict as well as to reproduce .
Animal sexual behaviour.0058	Seasonality Many animal species have specific mating -LRB- or breeding -RRB- seasons -LRB- seasonal breeding -RRB- .
Animal sexual behaviour.0059	These are often associated with changes to herd or group structure , and behavioural changes , including territorialism amongst individuals .
Animal sexual behaviour.0060	These may be annual -LRB- e.g. wolves -RRB- , biannual -LRB- e.g. dogs -RRB- or more frequently -LRB- e.g. horses -RRB- .
Animal sexual behaviour.0061	During these periods , females of most species are more mentally and physically receptive to sexual advances , a period scientifically described as estrous but commonly described as being `` in season '' or `` in heat '' , but outside them animals still engage in sexual behaviours , and such acts as do occur are not necessarily harmful .
Animal sexual behaviour.0062	Certain other animals -LRB- opportunistic breeders -RRB- breed dependent upon other conditions in their environment aside from time of year .
Animal sexual behaviour.0063	Interpretation bias The field of study of sexuality in non-human species has been a long standing taboo , with researchers either failing to observe or mis-categorizing and mis-describing sexual behaviour which does not meet their preconceptions .
Animal sexual behaviour.0064	-LRB- See : Observer bias . -RRB-
Animal sexual behaviour.0065	More current research provides views such as that of the Natural History Museum at the University of Oslo , which in 2006 held an exhibition on animal sexuality : An example of overlooking behaviour relates to descriptions of giraffe mating : Other aspects that are often misinterpreted by humans are the frequency and context in which animals engage in sexual behaviours .
Animal sexual behaviour.0066	For example , domestic or farm animals display behaviours like mounting and head butting during both sex and competition or combats with each other .
Animal sexual behaviour.0067	Careful analysis must be made to interpret what animal activities are implied by those behaviours .
Animal sexual behaviour.0068	Genetics and sex A study carried out by Moore et al. suggests that sexual differentiation is n't dependent only on hormones that are secreted by the gonads .
Animal sexual behaviour.0069	Genetic sex-determining factors also play a critical role in the sexual differentiation process .
Animal sexual behaviour.0070	These genetic factors may later go on to activate hormones secreted by the gonads .
Animal sexual behaviour.0071	More importantly , these genetic factors may be responsible for the differences between an organisms ' sexuality as seen in the animal kingdom .
Animal sexual behaviour.0072	This suggests that these inherited factors may be responsible for the varying degrees of sexuality observed and can be influenced by the environment as well as other physiological factors to develop a unique organism .
Animal sexual behaviour.0073	Sex for pleasure It is a common myth that animals do not -LRB- as a rule -RRB- have sex for pleasure , or alternatively that humans , pigs -LRB- and perhaps dolphins and one or two species of primate -RRB- are the only species which do .
Animal sexual behaviour.0074	This is sometimes formulated `` animals mate only for reproduction '' .
Animal sexual behaviour.0075	Science can not conclusively say at present what animals do or do not find `` pleasurable , '' a question considered in more depth under Emotion in animals .
Animal sexual behaviour.0076	The urban myth website Snopes.com considers this particular view in depth .
Animal sexual behaviour.0077	Its conclusions are broadly that the statement is true , but only using a very specific definition of `` sex for pleasure , '' in which sexual acts tied to a reproductive cycle or for which an alternative explanation can be asserted , are ignored , as is all sexual activity that does not involve penetration .
Animal sexual behaviour.0078	Animals put themselves at risk to engage in sex , and as a result , most species have evolved sexual signals -LRB- usually scent and behaviour -RRB- to indicate the presence of receptive periods .
Animal sexual behaviour.0079	During these , sex is sought , and outside these it is usually not sought .
Animal sexual behaviour.0080	Snopes comments that this is not in fact a reflection of whether sex is pleasurable or not , but rather a reflection of whether individuals have sex at arbitrary times .
Animal sexual behaviour.0081	They conclude : A 2006 Danish Animal Ethics Council report which examined current knowledge of animal sexuality in the context of legal queries concerning sexual acts by humans , has the following comments , primarily related to domestically common animals : Types of activity Autoeroticism or masturbation It appears that many animals , both male and female , masturbate , both when partners are available and otherwise .
Animal sexual behaviour.0082	It has also been observed in dogs .
Animal sexual behaviour.0083	For example , Petplace.com comments in its guide on assessing potential breeding stock purchases : `` Masturbation is a normal behavior in all stallions that does not reduce semen production or performance in the breeding shed '' Likewise a review from the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine says : Castration does not prevent masturbation , as it is observed in geldings .
Animal sexual behaviour.0084	Masturbation is common in both mares and stallions , before and after puberty .
Animal sexual behaviour.0085	Sexologist Havelock Ellis in his 1927 `` Studies in the Psychology of Sex '' identified bulls , goats , sheep , camels and elephants as species known to practice autoeroticism , adding of some other species : In his 1999 book , Biological exuberance , Bruce Bagemihl documents that : and that : Petter Bøckman of the Natural History Museum at the University of Oslo commented -LRB- in respect of a 2006 exhibition on homosexuality in the animal kingdom -RRB- that : Oral sex Animals of several species are documented as engaging in both autofellatio and oral sex .
Animal sexual behaviour.0086	Although easily confused by laypeople , this is a separate and sexually oriented behaviour , distinct from non-sexual grooming or the investigation of scents .
Animal sexual behaviour.0087	Auto-fellatio or oral sex in animals is documented in wolves , goats , primates , hyaenas , bats and sheep -LRB- see section Masturbation for details -RRB- .
Animal sexual behaviour.0088	Contraceptives Among monkeys , Lionel Tiger and Robin Fox conducted a study on how Depo-Provera contraceptives lead to decreased male attractiveness to females and eventually to male homosexuality .
Animal sexual behaviour.0089	Janet E. Smith summarizes the findings as follows : -LSB- The -RSB- study in the early 70s -LSB- ... -RSB- involved a tribe of monkeys .
Animal sexual behaviour.0090	The alpha monkey of this tribe , named Austin , chose three female monkeys to be his exclusive sexual partners .
Animal sexual behaviour.0091	Austin had a grand time with these three female monkeys .
Animal sexual behaviour.0092	Then the researchers injected Austin 's three females with the contraceptive Depo-Provera .
Animal sexual behaviour.0093	Austin stopped having sex with them and chose other female monkeys to be his sexual partners .
Animal sexual behaviour.0094	Then they contracepted all of the females in the tribe .
Animal sexual behaviour.0095	The males stopped having sex with the females and started behaving in a turbulent and confused manner .
Animal sexual behaviour.0096	Homosexual behaviour The presence of same-sex sexual behaviour was not scientifically observed on a large scale until recent times .
Animal sexual behaviour.0097	Homosexual behaviour does occur in the animal kingdom outside humans , especially in social species , particularly in marine birds and mammals , monkeys , and the great apes .
Animal sexual behaviour.0098	Homosexual behaviour has been observed among 1,500 species , and in 500 of those it is well documented .
Animal sexual behaviour.0099	Georgetown University professor Janet Mann has specifically theorised that homosexual behaviour , at least in dolphins , is an evolutionary advantage that minimizes intraspecies aggression , especially among males .
Animal sexual behaviour.0100	* Male penguin couples have been documented to mate for life , build nests together , and to use a stone as a surrogate egg in nesting and brooding .
Animal sexual behaviour.0101	In 2004 , the Central Park Zoo in the United States replaced one male couple 's stone with a fertilized egg , which the couple then raised as their own offspring .
Animal sexual behaviour.0102	German and Japanese zoos have also reported homosexual behaviour among their penguins .
Animal sexual behaviour.0103	This phenomenon has also been reported at Kelly Tarlton 's Aquarium in Auckland , New Zealand .
Animal sexual behaviour.0104	`` Humans have created the myth that sexuality can be justified only by reproduction , which by definition limits it to hetero sex , '' says Michael Bronski , author of The Pleasure Principle : Culture , Backlash , and the Struggle for Gay Freedom .
Animal sexual behaviour.0105	`` But here is an animal society that uses homosexuality to improve its social life . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0106	* Mounting of one female by another is common among cattle .
Animal sexual behaviour.0107	-LRB- See also , Freemartin .
Animal sexual behaviour.0108	Freemartins occur because of clearly causal hormonal factors at work during gestation . -RRB-
Animal sexual behaviour.0109	* Bonobos in zoos .
Animal sexual behaviour.0110	After studying the primates for his book Bonobo : The Forgotten Ape , primatologist Frans de Waal , a professor of psychology at Emory University in Atlanta , says that such expressions of intimacy are consistent with the homosexual behaviour of what he terms `` the erotic champions of the world . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0111	`` Same-sex , opposite-sex -- bonobos just love sex play , '' de Waal said in an interview .
Animal sexual behaviour.0112	`` They have so much sex , it gets boring . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0113	* Homosexual behaviour in male sheep -LRB- found in 6 -- 10 % of rams -RRB- is associated with variations in cerebral mass distribution and chemical activity .
Animal sexual behaviour.0114	A study reported in Endocrinology concluded that biological and physiological factors are in effect .
Animal sexual behaviour.0115	These findings are similar to human findings reported by Simon LeVay .
Animal sexual behaviour.0116	* Male bighorn sheep are divisible into two kinds : the typical males among whom homosexual behaviour , including intercourse , is common and `` effeminate sheep '' , or `` behavioural transvestites '' , which are not known to engage in homosexual behaviour .
Animal sexual behaviour.0117	* Homosexual behaviour has been observed among bats ; recently , in particular , the fruit bat .
Animal sexual behaviour.0118	Genital-genital rubbing Genital-genital rubbing , or GG rubbing , among non-human animals is sexual activity in which one animal rubs his or her genitals against the genitals of another animal .
Animal sexual behaviour.0119	The term GG rubbing is frequently used by primatologists to describe this type of sexual intimacy among female bonobos , and is stated to be the `` bonobo 's most typical sexual pattern , undocumented in any other primate '' .
Animal sexual behaviour.0120	The term is sometimes used in reference to GG rubbing among male bonobos , under the term `` penis fencing , '' which is the non-human form of frot that human males engage in .
Animal sexual behaviour.0121	Such rubbing between males is thought , according to varying evolutionary theorists , to have existed before the development of hominids into humans and bonobos , and may or may not have occurred in the homosexual activity of both of these genetically related species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0122	Genital rubbing has been observed among bull manatees , in conjunction with `` kissing , '' and is also common among homosexually active mammals .
Animal sexual behaviour.0123	Cross species sex While it is commonly believed that animal sexuality is instinctive and thus somewhat mechanistic , research regularly records that many animals are sexual opportunists , partaking in sexual relations with individuals of visibly distinct species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0124	This is more visible in domesticated species and animals in captivity , as domestication commonly selects for increased breeding rate -LRB- and so an accelerated breeding cycle has commonly arisen in domesticated species over the centuries -RRB- , and also because these species are more easily observed by humans .
Animal sexual behaviour.0125	Nevertheless , animals have been observed in the wild to attempt sexual activity with other species or indeed inanimate objects .
Animal sexual behaviour.0126	In the wild , where observation is harder , genetic studies have shown a `` large number '' of inter-species hybrids , and other investigations describe productive and non-productive inter-species mating as a `` natural occurrence '' .
Animal sexual behaviour.0127	Recent genetic evidence strongly suggesting this has occurred even within the history of the human species , and that early humans often had sexual activity with other primate species , is considered below .
Animal sexual behaviour.0128	Hybrid offspring can result from two organisms of distinct but closely related parent species , although the resulting offspring is not always fertile .
Animal sexual behaviour.0129	Due to the difficulties of observation , interspecies sex of this kind between two top-level predators , occurring in the wild , was only conclusively documented with the finding of a grizzly-polar bear hybrid in April 2006 .
Animal sexual behaviour.0130	Again , as with lions and tigers , the two species would normally not share enough common territory to provide adequate opportunity for much cross-species sexual activity .
Animal sexual behaviour.0131	Animal sexual advances on , and attempted interactions with , humans and other species , have been documented by ethologists such as Kohler , Gerald Durrell and Desmond Morris , as well as authoritative researchers such as Birute Galdikas who studied orangutans in Borneo .
Animal sexual behaviour.0132	Philosopher and animal welfare activist Peter Singer reports : Prostitution and sexual fetishes In some penguin species , the females , even when in a committed relationship , will exchange sexual favours with strange males for the pebbles they need to build their nests .
Animal sexual behaviour.0133	Prostitution was also observed among chimpanzees , who trade food for sex .
Animal sexual behaviour.0134	Although not often reported , animals , or primates at the least , are able to sexualize inanimate objects similar to the way human beings sexualize the objects of their sexual fetishes .
Animal sexual behaviour.0135	Not only will an animal that has a habitual object for masturbation sometimes appear to sexualize that object , primates have generalized further to sexualize kinds of objects for which no instinctual or prior sexual connection exists .
Animal sexual behaviour.0136	Gabriel , a chimpanzee at the Southwest National Primate Research Center , is said to have a shoe fetish -LRB- or possibly a leather fetish -RRB- according to caretaker Bert Barrera , and it is reported that `` he once found an opening in his enclosure that was large enough to grab a caretaker 's foot and he held on until she relinquished a boot . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0137	The sexualization of objects or locations is also well recognized in the breeding world .
Animal sexual behaviour.0138	So for example , stallions may often become sexually aroused upon visiting a location where they have been allowed to have sex before , or upon seeing a stimulus previously associated with sexual activity such as an artificial vagina .
Animal sexual behaviour.0139	In this case however , the primary structure is Pavlovian conditioning , and the fetishistic association is due to a conditioned response -LRB- or association -RRB- formed with a distinctive ` reward ' .
Animal sexual behaviour.0140	Human fetishism can also be traced back to similar or near-identical conditioning : likewise based upon the Pavlovian association between an erotic sensation or anticipation , and objects which become mentally associated with that activity .
Animal sexual behaviour.0141	Sexual imagery viewing A study by Platt , Khera and Deaner at Duke University -LRB- reported in Current Biology and online here -RRB- , showed that male monkeys will give up privileges -LRB- in this case , juice , which is highly valued -RRB- , to be allowed to see a female monkey 's hindquarters .
Animal sexual behaviour.0142	Deaner and his team reported that monkeys would take a juice cut to look at powerful males ' faces or the perineum of a female , but to persuade the monkeys to stare at subordinate males , the researchers had to bribe them with larger drinks .
Animal sexual behaviour.0143	`` Virtually all -LSB- male -RSB- monkeys will give up juice to see female hindquarters ... they really value the images . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0144	The researchers stress that in monkey society , such behaviours have great social utility and we should therefore not simply reach the conclusion that `` monkeys enjoy pornographic pictures '' .
Animal sexual behaviour.0145	There is no evidence at this point that viewable pictures or movies of sexual activity are valued for their sexual enjoyment , although as noted above -LRB- Masturbation -RRB- , there are reports that watching sex in real life may have such an effect .
Animal sexual behaviour.0146	The subject of animals and sexual imagery is not yet well researched .
Animal sexual behaviour.0147	Problems with encouraging pandas to mate in captivity have been very common .
Animal sexual behaviour.0148	However , showing young male pandas `` panda pornography '' is widely credited with a recent population boom among pandas in zoos .
Animal sexual behaviour.0149	Rape Controversial interpretations and implications aside -LRB- see Sociobiological theories of rape -RRB- , sex in a forceful or apparently coercive context has also been documented in a variety of species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0150	A notable example is bottlenose dolphins , where at times , a pod of bachelor males will ` corner ' a female ' ... although what happens once the males have herded in a female , and whether she goes for one or all of them , is not yet known : the researchers have yet to witness a dolphin copulation . '
Animal sexual behaviour.0151	The behaviour is also common in some arachnids -LRB- spiders -RRB- , notably those whose females eat the males during sex if not tricked with food and/or tied down with threads , and in some herbivorous herd species or species where males and females are very different in size , where the male dominates sexually by sheer force and size .
Animal sexual behaviour.0152	Some species of birds appear to combine sexual intercourse with apparent violent assault ; these include ducks , geese , and white-fronted bee-eaters .
Animal sexual behaviour.0153	According to Emlen and Wrege -LRB- 1986 -RRB- forced copulations occur in this socially nesting species , and females must avoid the unwelcome attention of males as they emerge from their nest burrows or they are forced to the ground and mated with .
Animal sexual behaviour.0154	Apparently , such attacks are made preferentially on females who are laying and who may thus mother their offspring as a result .
Animal sexual behaviour.0155	In 2007 , research suggested that in the Acilius genus of water beetles -LRB- also known as `` diving beetles '' -RRB- , an `` evolutionary arms race '' between the two sexes means that there is no courtship system for these beetles .
Animal sexual behaviour.0156	`` It 's a system of rape .
Animal sexual behaviour.0157	But the females do n't take things quietly .
Animal sexual behaviour.0158	They evolve counter-weapons . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0159	Cited mating behaviours include males suffocating females underwater till exhausted , and allowing only occasional access to the surface to breathe for up to six hours -LRB- to prevent them breeding with other males -RRB- , and females which have a variety of body shapings -LRB- to prevent males from gaining a grip -RRB- .
Animal sexual behaviour.0160	Foreplay is `` limited to the female desperately trying to dislodge the male by swimming frantically around . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0161	Charles Siebert reports in his New York Times article Elephant Crackup ?
Animal sexual behaviour.0162	that : This interpretation of the elephants ' behaviour is , however , disputed by Rob Slotow , one of the original study 's authors .
Animal sexual behaviour.0163	He states there was `` nothing sexual about these attacks '' .
Animal sexual behaviour.0164	Sex between adults and juveniles It has also been recorded that certain species of mole will impregnate newborns of their own species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0165	It is not clear if this is forceful or not .
Animal sexual behaviour.0166	Similarly , the male stoat -LRB- Mustela erminea -RRB- will mate with infant females of their species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0167	This is apparently a natural part of their reproductive biology -- there is a delayed gestation period , so these females give birth the following year when they are fully grown .
Animal sexual behaviour.0168	A male spotted hyena attempted to mate with a female hyena which succeeded in driving him off .
Animal sexual behaviour.0169	He eventually turned to his ten-month-old cub , repeatedly mounting it and ejaculating on it .
Animal sexual behaviour.0170	The cub sometimes ignored this and sometimes struggled ` slightly as if in play ' .
Animal sexual behaviour.0171	The mother did not intervene .
Animal sexual behaviour.0172	Infants and children in bonobo societies are often involved in sexual behaviour .
Animal sexual behaviour.0173	Among insects , there have been recordings of females being forcibly copulated , sometimes before adulthood .
Animal sexual behaviour.0174	Among primates , interest towards sexually immature varies amongst different species under different circumstances and situations .
Animal sexual behaviour.0175	Amongst chimpanzees , juvenile males -LRB- equivalent of human teens -RRB- have been recorded mounting and copulating with immature members of the species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0176	Amongst bonobos , immature males have been recorded initiating genital play with female adult or female adolescent bonobos .
Animal sexual behaviour.0177	Copulation-like contact between immature bonobo males and mature female bonobos increases with age and continues until the male bonobo has reached juvenile age .
Animal sexual behaviour.0178	On the other hand , adult gorillas do not show any sexual interest in juvenile or infant members of their species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0179	Primates regularly have sex in full view of infants , juveniles and younger members of their species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0180	Sexual cannibalism and necrophilia Sexual cannibalism , which has been documented in arachnids , insects and amphipods , is a phenomenon in which a female organism kills and consumes the male before , during , or after copulation .
Animal sexual behaviour.0181	Although it does confer some known advantages to reproduction , whether or not the male is complicit has not been scientifically determined .
Animal sexual behaviour.0182	Necrophilia in animals is where a living animal engages in a sexual act with a dead animal .
Animal sexual behaviour.0183	In one of the most well-known examples , Kees Moeliker of the Rotterdam Natural History Museum , Netherlands observed sexual activities outside his office between a live duck and a dead one .
Animal sexual behaviour.0184	Two male mallards which Moeliker believed were engaged in rape flight , a common motif in duck sexual behaviour , collided with his window .
Animal sexual behaviour.0185	`` When one died the other one just went for it and did n't get any negative feedback -- well , did n't get any feedback , '' according to Moeliker , who described the event as `` homosexual necrophilia . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0186	The case was reported scientifically in Deinsea 8-2001 , along with photos , and earned Moeliker an Ig Nobel Prize in biology , awarded for research that can not or should not be reproduced .
Animal sexual behaviour.0187	Additionally , male cane toads have been documented -LRB- in Cane Toads : An Unnatural History -RRB- engaging in copulation with dead toads and inanimate objects .
Animal sexual behaviour.0188	Neurochemistry Oxytocin , called the hormone of love , is found in the hypothalamus of the brain and is associated with the ability to maintain healthy interpersonal relationships as well as physiological changes during reproduction .
Animal sexual behaviour.0189	These changes include stimulation of the mammary glands to release milk , and assists in contracting the uterus during the final stages of childbirth .
Animal sexual behaviour.0190	Oxytocin may also be the biological reason why mothers feel a need to cuddle and protect young .
Animal sexual behaviour.0191	Some studies have indicated that women who experience strong positive emotions also have an increase in oxytocin release .
Animal sexual behaviour.0192	Vasopressin , also called antidiuretic hormorne -LRB- ADH -RRB- , is another hormone found in the Hypothalamus .
Animal sexual behaviour.0193	Vasopressin is responsible for regulating blood volume and salt concentration .
Animal sexual behaviour.0194	Oxytocin and vasopressin are also involved in parenting habits as they contribute to feelings of protection and evoke spending time raising young .
Animal sexual behaviour.0195	Role of neurohormones in two species of vole 's mating styles The mating style of prairie voles is monogamous .
Animal sexual behaviour.0196	After a male and female prairie vole sexually reproduces with one another , they form a lifelong bond .
Animal sexual behaviour.0197	Montane voles , on the other hand , exhibit a polygamous mating style .
Animal sexual behaviour.0198	When montane voles fornicate , they form no attachments -- each set-off and go their separate way after copulation .
Animal sexual behaviour.0199	Studies on the brains of these two species of voles have found that it is two neurohormones and their respective receptors that are responsible for these differences in mating strategies .
Animal sexual behaviour.0200	Male prairie voles emit vasopressin after copulating with a female prairie vole .
Animal sexual behaviour.0201	An attachment to the female then ensues .
Animal sexual behaviour.0202	Female prairie voles will release oxytocin after reproducing with a male prairie vole .
Animal sexual behaviour.0203	An attachment to this male prairie vole likewise ensues .
Animal sexual behaviour.0204	In montane voles -- both males and females -- such a high quantity of oxytocin and vasopressin does not exist in their brains when they mate .
Animal sexual behaviour.0205	Even when injected with oxytocin or vasopressin the mating style of the montane vole does not change ; contrast this to the prairie vole who , even without mating , may form a lifelong attachment to another prairie vole of the opposite sex , if oxytocin or vasopressin is injected into him or her .
Animal sexual behaviour.0206	The reason for this is that prairie voles have more oxytocin and vasopressin receptors than do montane voles , and are thus far more receptive to the two neurohormones .
Animal sexual behaviour.0207	It is not the quantity of the hormone that determine social attachment , mating bonds and sexual lust , but rather the number of receptors receptive to that quantity .
Animal sexual behaviour.0208	Role of oxytocin in rat sexual behaviour Oxytocin is also referred to as the love hormone because it plays such a large role in all the basic elements of life ; copulation , birth , care and bonding .
Animal sexual behaviour.0209	Oxytocin is released during pregnancy and surges after birth of mammalian young .
Animal sexual behaviour.0210	This surge allows the animals to affectively bond with their young , care for them , as well as protect them from harm .
Animal sexual behaviour.0211	Rats experience dual motivations as we will see shortly .
Animal sexual behaviour.0212	Studies have shown that without oxytocin , rats will not experience this maternal behaviour which shows that oxytocin truly plays a role in the motherhood of rats .
Animal sexual behaviour.0213	Female rats show some interesting characteristics in regards to sexual behaviour .
Animal sexual behaviour.0214	Mother rats may solicit male rats to their nest after the birth of their young .
Animal sexual behaviour.0215	Mother rats show maternal instincts most heavily right after birth very similarly to the way humans do .
Animal sexual behaviour.0216	This is referred to as postpartum estrus in rats .
Animal sexual behaviour.0217	The female mother rats will solicit male rats to the nest but at the same time will become aggressive towards them in protection of her young .
Animal sexual behaviour.0218	This shows that rats can carry on two completely opposite motivations at once and that the male rat is just a neutral stimulus .
Animal sexual behaviour.0219	This is true of typical rats when they experience the normal levels of oxytocin , but if the rat is given injections of an oxytocin antagonist , they will no longer experience these maternal instincts -LRB- Kennet 2012 -RRB- .
Animal sexual behaviour.0220	The lack of maternal behaviour points to the idea that oxytocin plays a large role in bonding as well .
Animal sexual behaviour.0221	Studies show that bonding in rats is achieved through the secretion of prolactin .
Animal sexual behaviour.0222	Prolactin also regulates a wide array of activities and feelings from stress to immunity .
Animal sexual behaviour.0223	This prolactin is released largely after birth , during feeding of the young , mating , and the presence of ovarian steroids -LRB- Kennet 2012 -RRB- .
Animal sexual behaviour.0224	This increase in prolactin has been shown to be regulated largely by oxytocin .
Animal sexual behaviour.0225	Role of oxytocin in primate sexual behaviour Oxytocin plays a similar role in primates as it does in humans .
Animal sexual behaviour.0226	The levels are increased heavily at birth and are maintained through the feeding and caring process .
Animal sexual behaviour.0227	The hormones also play a role in the ability for monkeys to soothe their partners .
Animal sexual behaviour.0228	When the monkey experiences a period of distress , the higher oxytocin monkeys were much more able to soothe their partners than monkeys who had lower levels of oxytocin .
Animal sexual behaviour.0229	Similar to any human parent child relationship , the role of oxytocin in monkeys is much alike .
Animal sexual behaviour.0230	The similarities between monkeys and humans are generally very obvious , and their care for their young is similar to ours .
Animal sexual behaviour.0231	Oxytocin has much of the same affect , and most mammals experience these actions the same way .
Animal sexual behaviour.0232	Additionally , there have been instances where monkeys have cared for human babies , and humans have cared for monkeys allowing for bonding to occur across species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0233	At Brookfield Zoo in Chicago , a small toddler fell into a pit with the 500 pound gorillas .
Animal sexual behaviour.0234	Much to everyone 's surprise the large gorilla picked up the toddler and protected her from harm until authorities came to help the child .
Animal sexual behaviour.0235	This shows that the care that these apes have for their young is similar to ours , and also that the protection of young in general is a paramount part of their life cycle .
Animal sexual behaviour.0236	The bonding process is also shown through the use of grooming , much like human parents and their children .
Animal sexual behaviour.0237	Grooming , sex , and cuddling frequencies correlate positively with levels of oxytocin .
Animal sexual behaviour.0238	As the level of oxytocin increases so does the interest in sex , and grooming .
Animal sexual behaviour.0239	While oxytocin plays a major role in parent child relationships , it is also found to play a role in adult sexual relationships .
Animal sexual behaviour.0240	Its secretion affects the nature of the relationship or if there will even be a relationship at all .
Animal sexual behaviour.0241	Studies have shown that oxytocin is much higher in monkeys that are in lifelong monogamous relationships as opposed to monkeys which are single .
Animal sexual behaviour.0242	Similarly the oxytocin levels of the couples correlated positively .
Animal sexual behaviour.0243	When the oxytocin secretion of one increased the other one increased along with it .
Animal sexual behaviour.0244	Higher levels of oxytocin also showed that monkeys exhibit more behaviours such as cuddling , grooming , and sex while lower levels of oxytocin mean less interest in these activities .
Animal sexual behaviour.0245	Research on oxytocin 's role in the animal brain suggests that it plays less of a role in behaviours of love and affection than previously believed .
Animal sexual behaviour.0246	`` When oxytocin was first discovered in 1909 , it was thought mostly to influence a mother 's labor contractions and milk let-down .
Animal sexual behaviour.0247	Then , in the 1990s , research with prairie voles found that giving them a dose of oxytocin resulted in the formation of a bond with their future mate -LRB- Azar , 40 -RRB- . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0248	Oxytocin has since been treated by the media as the sole player in the `` love and mating game '' in mammals .
Animal sexual behaviour.0249	This view , however , is proving to be false as , `` most hormones do n't influence behaviour directly .
Animal sexual behaviour.0250	Rather , they affect thinking and emotions in variable ways -LRB- Azar , 40 -RRB- . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0251	There is much more involved in sexual behaviour in the mammalian animal than oxytocin and vasopressin can explain .
Animal sexual behaviour.0252	Specific species Mammals The bonobo , which has a matriarchal society , is a fully bisexual species -- both males and females engage in sexual behaviour with the same and the opposite sex , with females being particularly noted for engaging in sexual behaviour with each other and at up to 75 % of sexual activity being nonreproductive .
Animal sexual behaviour.0253	Primatologist Frans de Waal believes that bonobos use sexual activity to resolve conflict between individuals .
Animal sexual behaviour.0254	Sexual activity occurs between almost all ages and sexes of bonobo societies .
Animal sexual behaviour.0255	Male bottlenose dolphins have been observed working in pairs to follow or restrict the movement of a female for weeks at a time , waiting for her to become sexually receptive .
Animal sexual behaviour.0256	The same pairs have also been observed engaging in intense sexual play with each other .
Animal sexual behaviour.0257	Janet Mann , a professor of biology and psychology at Georgetown University , argues that the common same-sex behaviour among male dolphin calves is about bond formation and benefits the species evolutionarily .
Animal sexual behaviour.0258	They cite studies that have shown the dolphins later in life are bisexual and the male bonds forged from homosexuality work for protection as well as locating females with which to reproduce .
Animal sexual behaviour.0259	In 1991 , an English man was prosecuted for allegedly having sexual contact with a dolphin .
Animal sexual behaviour.0260	The man was found not guilty after it was revealed at trial that the dolphin was known to tow bathers through the water by hooking his large penis around them .
Animal sexual behaviour.0261	Some horses have environment or appearance preferences when selecting mates .
Animal sexual behaviour.0262	There is also anecdotal evidence of limited bisexual behaviour in some stallions , although there is -LRB- as of 2008 -RRB- no conclusive scientific confirmation .
Animal sexual behaviour.0263	The anecdotal evidence claims this is most likely to occur in a single isolated group , with no access to mares .
Animal sexual behaviour.0264	Male lions often lead their social groups jointly with one or more of their brothers .
Animal sexual behaviour.0265	To ensure loyalty , the male co-leaders will `` strengthen the bonds '' by often having sex with each other .
Animal sexual behaviour.0266	Both male and female lions have been seen to interact homosexually .
Animal sexual behaviour.0267	Male lions pair-bond for a number of days and initiate homosexual activity with affectionate nuzzling and caressing , leading to mounting and thrusting .
Animal sexual behaviour.0268	About 8 % of mountings have been observed to occur with other males .
Animal sexual behaviour.0269	Pairings between females are held to be fairly common in captivity but have not been observed in the wild .
Animal sexual behaviour.0270	Most lionesses will have reproduced by the time they are four years of age .
Animal sexual behaviour.0271	Lions do not mate at any specific time of year , and the females are polyestrous .
Animal sexual behaviour.0272	As with other cats ' penises , the male lion 's penis has spines which point backwards .
Animal sexual behaviour.0273	Upon withdrawal of the penis , the spines rake the walls of the female 's vagina , which may cause ovulation .
Animal sexual behaviour.0274	A lioness may mate with more than one male when she is in heat ; during a mating bout , which could last several days , the couple copulates twenty to forty times a day , often forgoing eating .
Animal sexual behaviour.0275	Lions reproduce very well in captivity .
Animal sexual behaviour.0276	North American river otters typically breed from December to April .
Animal sexual behaviour.0277	Copulation lasts from 16 -- 73 minutes and may occur in water or on land .
Animal sexual behaviour.0278	During the breeding , the male grabs the female by the neck with his teeth .
Animal sexual behaviour.0279	Copulation is vigorous , and is interrupted by periods of rest .
Animal sexual behaviour.0280	Females may caterwaul during or shortly after mating .
Animal sexual behaviour.0281	Female estrus lasts about a month per year , and true gestation lasts 61 -- 63 days .
Animal sexual behaviour.0282	Delayed implantation distinguishes the species from the European otter , which lacks this adaptation .
Animal sexual behaviour.0283	In the greater short-nosed fruit bat , copulation by males is dorsoventral and the females lick the shaft or the base of the male 's penis , but not the glans which has already penetrated the vagina .
Animal sexual behaviour.0284	While the females do this , the penis is not withdrawn and research has shown a positive relationship between length of the time that the penis is licked and the duration of copulation .
Animal sexual behaviour.0285	Post copulation genital grooming has also been observed .
Animal sexual behaviour.0286	As with most tetrapods , canine copulation involves the male mounting the female from behind , a position informally referred to as `` doggy style '' .
Animal sexual behaviour.0287	When a male canine is interested in mounting a female , he will sniff the female 's vulva .
Animal sexual behaviour.0288	If the female is unreceptive , she may sit , lie down , snap , retreat , or otherwise be uncooperative .
Animal sexual behaviour.0289	If the female is receptive , she will stand still and hold her tail to the side , a stance referred to as `` flagging '' .
Animal sexual behaviour.0290	The male will often continue examining the female 's rear , before mounting her from behind whilst attempting penetration with his penis .
Animal sexual behaviour.0291	Red foxes reproduce once a year in spring .
Animal sexual behaviour.0292	The vixen 's oestrus period lasts 3 weeks , during which the dog-foxes mate with the vixens for several days , often in burrows .
Animal sexual behaviour.0293	Copulation is accompanied by a copulatory tie which may last for more than an hour .
Animal sexual behaviour.0294	The copulatory tie occurs when the bulbus glandis at the base of the male fox 's penis enlarges .
Animal sexual behaviour.0295	Though foxes are largely monogamous , DNA evidence from one population indicated large levels of polygyny , incest and mixed paternity litters .
Animal sexual behaviour.0296	Subordinate vixens may become pregnant , but usually fail to whelp , or have their kits killed postpartum by either the dominant female or other subordinates .
Animal sexual behaviour.0297	Golden jackal The golden jackal 's courtship rituals are remarkably long , during which the breeding pair remains almost constantly together .
Animal sexual behaviour.0298	The mating process may last 26 -- 28 days .
Animal sexual behaviour.0299	In Transcaucasia , estrus begins in early February , and occasionally late January during warm winters .
Animal sexual behaviour.0300	Spermatogenesis in males occurs 10 -- 12 days before the females enter estrus and , during this time , males ' testicles triple in weight .
Animal sexual behaviour.0301	Estrus lasts for three to four days , and females failing to mate during this time will undergo a loss of receptivity which lasts six to eight days .
Animal sexual behaviour.0302	Females undergoing their first estrus are often pursued by several males , which will quarrel amongst themselves .
Animal sexual behaviour.0303	Prior to mating , the pair patrols and scent marks its territory .
Animal sexual behaviour.0304	Copulation is preceded by the female holding her tail out and angled in such a way that the genitalia are exposed .
Animal sexual behaviour.0305	The two approach each other , whimpering , lifting their tails and bristling their fur , displaying varying intensities of offensive and defensive behaviour .
Animal sexual behaviour.0306	The female sniffs and licks the male 's genitals , whilst the male nuzzles the female 's fur .
Animal sexual behaviour.0307	They may circle each other and fight briefly .
Animal sexual behaviour.0308	The male then proceeds to lick the female 's vulva , and repeatedly mounts her without erection or hip thrusting .
Animal sexual behaviour.0309	Actual copulation takes place days later , and continues for about a week .
Animal sexual behaviour.0310	The copulatory tie lasts 20 -- 45 minutes in Eurasia , while in Africa it lasts roughly four minutes .
Animal sexual behaviour.0311	Toward the end of estrus , the pair drifts apart , with the female often approaching the male in a more submissive manner than before .
Animal sexual behaviour.0312	In anticipation of the role he will take in raising pups , the male disgorges or surrenders any food he has to the female .
Animal sexual behaviour.0313	Gray wolf The gray wolf is generally monogamous , with mated pairs usually remaining together for life , unless one of the pair dies .
Animal sexual behaviour.0314	Upon the death of one mated wolf , pairs are quickly re-established .
Animal sexual behaviour.0315	Since males often predominate in any given wolf population , unpaired females are a rarity .
Animal sexual behaviour.0316	If a dispersing male wolf is unable to establish a territory or find a mate , he mates with the daughters of already established breeding pairs from other packs .
Animal sexual behaviour.0317	Such wolves are termed `` Casanova wolves '' and , unlike males from established packs , they do not form pair bonds with the females they mate with .
Animal sexual behaviour.0318	Some wolf packs may have multiple breeding females this way , as is the case in Yellowstone National Park .
Animal sexual behaviour.0319	The age of first breeding in wolves depends largely on environmental factors : when food is plentiful , or when wolf populations are heavily managed , wolves can rear pups at younger ages in order to better exploit abundant resources .
Animal sexual behaviour.0320	This is further demonstrated by the fact that captive wolves have been known to breed as soon as they reach 9 -- 10 months , while the youngest recorded breeding wolves in the wild were 2 years old .
Animal sexual behaviour.0321	Estrus typically occurs in late winter , with older , multiparous females entering estrus 2 -- 3 weeks earlier than younger females .
Animal sexual behaviour.0322	When receptive , the female averts the base of her tail to one side , exposing the vulva .
Animal sexual behaviour.0323	During mating , the pair is locked into a copulatory tie , which may last 5 -- 36 minutes .
Animal sexual behaviour.0324	The copulatory tie is caused by the swelling of the male wolf 's penis inside the female 's vulva .
Animal sexual behaviour.0325	Wolves are able to separate from a copulatory tie more readily than domestic dogs .
Animal sexual behaviour.0326	Because estrus in wolves lasts only a month , male wolves do not abandon their mates to find other females to inseminate as dogs do .
Animal sexual behaviour.0327	Spotted hyenas The female spotted hyena has a unique urinary-genital system , closely resembling the penis of the male , called a pseudo-penis .
Animal sexual behaviour.0328	The family structure is matriarchal and dominance relationships with strong sexual elements are routinely observed between related females .
Animal sexual behaviour.0329	They are notable for using visible sexual arousal as a sign of submission and not dominance , in males as well as females -LRB- females have a sizable erectile clitoris -RRB- , to the extent that biologist Robert Sapolsky speculates that in order to facilitate this , their sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems may be partially reversed in respect to their reproductive organs .
Animal sexual behaviour.0330	The spotted hyena is a non-seasonal breeder , though a birth peak does occur during the wet season .
Animal sexual behaviour.0331	Females are polyestrus , with an estrus period lasting two weeks .
Animal sexual behaviour.0332	Like many felid species , the spotted hyena is promiscuous , and no enduring pair bonds are formed .
Animal sexual behaviour.0333	Members of both sexes may copulate with several mates over the course of several years .
Animal sexual behaviour.0334	Males will show submissive behaviour when approaching females in heat , even if the male outweighs its partner .
Animal sexual behaviour.0335	Females usually favour younger males born or joined into the clan after they were born .
Animal sexual behaviour.0336	Older females show a similar preference , with the addition of preferring males with whom they have had long and friendly prior relationships .
Animal sexual behaviour.0337	Passive males tend to have greater success in courting females than aggressive ones .
Animal sexual behaviour.0338	Copulation in spotted hyenas is a relatively short affair , which typically only occurs at night with no other hyenas present .
Animal sexual behaviour.0339	The mating process is complicated , as the female 's reproductive tract is entered and exited through her pseudo-penis rather than directly through the vagina , which is blocked by the false scrotum and testes .
Animal sexual behaviour.0340	Once the female retracts her clitoris , the male enters the female by sliding beneath her , an operation facilitated by the penis 's upward angle .
Animal sexual behaviour.0341	The male must practice this act , which can take a couple of months to successfully perform .
Animal sexual behaviour.0342	Once the act is accomplished , a typical mammalian mating posture is adopted .
Animal sexual behaviour.0343	The family structure of the Spotted Hyena is matriarchal , and dominance relationships with strong sexual elements are routinely observed between related females .
Animal sexual behaviour.0344	Due largely to the female spotted hyena 's unique urogenital system , early naturalists thought hyenas were hermaphroditic males who commonly practiced homosexuality .
Animal sexual behaviour.0345	Early writings such as Ovid 's Metamorphoses and the Physiologus suggested that the hyena continually changed its sex and nature from male to female and back again .
Animal sexual behaviour.0346	In Paedagogus , Clement of Alexandria noted that the hyena -LRB- along with the hare -RRB- was `` quite obsessed with sexual intercourse . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0347	Many Europeans associated the hyena with sexual deformity , prostitution , deviant sexual behavior , and even witchcraft .
Animal sexual behaviour.0348	The reality behind the confusing reports is the sexually aggressive behavior between the females , including mounting between females .
Animal sexual behaviour.0349	Research has shown that `` in contrast to most other female mammals , female Crocuta are male-like in appearance , larger than males , and substantially more aggressive , '' and they have `` been masculinized without being defeminized . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0350	Study of this unique genitalia and aggressive behavior in the female hyena has led to the understanding that more aggressive females are better able to compete for resources , including food and mating partners .
Animal sexual behaviour.0351	Research has shown that `` elevated levels of testosterone in utero '' contribute to extra aggressiveness ; both males and females mount members of both the same and opposite sex , who in turn are possibly acting more submissive because of lower levels of testosterone in utero .
Animal sexual behaviour.0352	Sheep An October 2003 study by Dr. Charles E. Roselli et al. -LRB- Oregon Health & Science University -RRB- states that homosexuality in male sheep -LRB- found in 8 % of rams -RRB- is associated with a region in the rams ' brains which the authors call the `` ovine Sexually Dimorphic Nucleus '' -LRB- oSDN -RRB- which is half the size of the corresponding region in other male sheep .
Animal sexual behaviour.0353	However , some view this study to be flawed in that the determination of homosexuality within the sheep , -LRB- sample population of twenty-seven for the study -RRB- , was to have animals who were unable to mount female ewes placed in a cage with two stanchioned males and two unstanchioned females -LRB- that is , the males could not move or struggle while the females could -RRB- .
Animal sexual behaviour.0354	Given the aggressive nature of the sheep copulation , the uneven treatment of males and females , many see this as simply evidence that the sheep in question were unable to be aggressive enough to mount females .
Animal sexual behaviour.0355	Some say that the results were situational sexuality , unlike the bonds seen in human homosexuality .
Animal sexual behaviour.0356	The scientists found that , `` The oSDN in rams that preferred females was significantly larger and contained more neurons than in male-oriented rams and ewes .
Animal sexual behaviour.0357	In addition , the oSDN of the female-oriented rams expressed higher levels of aromatase , a substance that converts testosterone to estradiol , an estrogen hormone believed to facilitate typical male sexual behaviours .
Animal sexual behaviour.0358	Aromatase expression was no different between male-oriented rams and ewes . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0359	`` The dense cluster of neurons that comprise the oSDN express cytochrome P450 aromatase .
Animal sexual behaviour.0360	Aromatase mRNA levels in the oSDN were significantly greater in female-oriented rams than in ewes , whereas male-oriented rams exhibited intermediate levels of expression . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0361	These results suggest that '' ... naturally occurring variations in sexual partner preferences may be related to differences in brain anatomy and its capacity for estrogen synthesis . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0362	As noted previously , given the potential ingressiveness of the male population in question , the differing aromatase levels may also have been evidence of aggression levels , not sexuality .
Animal sexual behaviour.0363	The results of this study have not been confirmed by others .
Animal sexual behaviour.0364	Other vertebrates Seahorses Seahorses , long upheld as monogamous and mating for life , are identified as `` promiscuous , flighty , and more than a little bit gay '' according to research published in 2007 .
Animal sexual behaviour.0365	Scientists at 15 aquariums studied 90 seahorses of 3 species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0366	Of 3168 sexual encounters , 37 % were same sex acts .
Animal sexual behaviour.0367	Flirting was common -LRB- up to 25 potential partners a day of both sexes -RRB- ; only one species -LRB- the British Spiny Seahorse -RRB- included faithful representatives , and for these 5 of 17 were faithful , 12 were not .
Animal sexual behaviour.0368	Bisexuality was widespread and considered `` both a great surprise and a shock '' , with big-bellied seahorses of both sexes not showing partner preference .
Animal sexual behaviour.0369	1986 contacts were male-female , 836 were female-female and 346 were male-male .
Animal sexual behaviour.0370	Birds Some black swans of Australia form sexually active male-male mated pairs and steal nests , or form temporary threesomes with females to obtain eggs , driving away the female after she lays the eggs .
Animal sexual behaviour.0371	More of their cygnets survive to adulthood than those of different-sex pairs possibly due to their superior ability to defend large portions of land .
Animal sexual behaviour.0372	In early February 2004 the New York Times reported that a male pair of chinstrap penguins named Roy and Silo in the Central Park Zoo in New York City were partnered and had successfully hatched a female chick from an egg .
Animal sexual behaviour.0373	Other penguins in New York have also been reported to be forming same-sex pairs .
Animal sexual behaviour.0374	Zoos in Japan and Germany have also documented male penguin couples .
Animal sexual behaviour.0375	The couples have been shown to build nests together and use a stone to replace an egg in the nest .
Animal sexual behaviour.0376	Researchers at Rikkyo University in Tokyo , found twenty such pairs at sixteen major aquariums and zoos in Japan .
Animal sexual behaviour.0377	Bremerhaven Zoo in Germany attempted to break up the male couples by importing female penguins from Sweden and separating the male couples ; they were unsuccessful .
Animal sexual behaviour.0378	The zoo director stated the relationships were too strong between the couples .
Animal sexual behaviour.0379	Recently , a mated pair of swans in Boston were found to both be female .
Animal sexual behaviour.0380	They too had attempted to raise eggs together .
Animal sexual behaviour.0381	Studies have shown that ten to 15 % of female western gulls in some populations in the wild prefer other females .
Animal sexual behaviour.0382	As many as 19 % of mallard pairs in a given population have been observed to consist of male-male homosexuals .
Animal sexual behaviour.0383	In 2009 at a zoo in Bremerhaven , Germany , two male adult humboldt penguins adopted an egg that had been abandoned by its biological parents .
Animal sexual behaviour.0384	After the egg hatched , the two penguins raised , protected , cared for , and fed the chick in the same manner that heterosexual penguins raise their own biological offspring .
Animal sexual behaviour.0385	Lizards Whip-tailed lizard females have the ability to reproduce through parthenogenesis and as such males are rare and sexual breeding non-standard .
Animal sexual behaviour.0386	Females engage in sexual behaviour to stimulate ovulation , with their behaviour following their hormonal cycles ; during low levels of estrogen , these -LRB- female -RRB- lizards engage in `` masculine '' sexual roles .
Animal sexual behaviour.0387	Those animals with currently high estrogen levels assume `` feminine '' sexual roles .
Animal sexual behaviour.0388	Lizards that perform the courtship ritual have greater fecundity than those kept in isolation due to an increase in hormones triggered by the sexual behaviours .
Animal sexual behaviour.0389	So , even though asexual whiptail lizards populations lack males , sexual stimuli still increase reproductive success .
Animal sexual behaviour.0390	From an evolutionary standpoint these females are passing their full genetic code to all of their offspring rather than the 50 % of genes that would be passed in sexual reproduction .
Animal sexual behaviour.0391	Certain species of gecko also reproduce by parthenogenesis .
Animal sexual behaviour.0392	Invertebrates Penis fencing is a mating behaviour engaged in by certain species of flatworm , such as Pseudobiceros bedfordi .
Animal sexual behaviour.0393	Species which engage in the practice are hermaphroditic , possessing both eggs and sperm-producing testes .
Animal sexual behaviour.0394	The species `` fence '' using two-headed dagger-like penises which are pointed , and white in color .
Animal sexual behaviour.0395	One organism inseminates the other .
Animal sexual behaviour.0396	The sperm is absorbed through pores in the skin , causing fertilization .
Animal sexual behaviour.0397	The butterflies spend much time on searching for mates .
Animal sexual behaviour.0398	When the male spots his mate , he will fly closer and closer and release the chemical substance called pheromones .
Animal sexual behaviour.0399	The male makes a special `` courtship dance '' which may consist of some special dancing postures to attract the female .
Animal sexual behaviour.0400	If the female appreciates his dancing , she may join him .
Animal sexual behaviour.0401	Then they join their bodies together end to end at their abdomens .
Animal sexual behaviour.0402	Here , the male passes the sperm to the female 's egg-laying tube which will soon be fertilized by the sperm .
Animal sexual behaviour.0403	The male often has to face death shortly after mating .
Animal sexual behaviour.0404	This is one of the reasons why butterflies are considered to have unusual sexual behaviour .
Animal sexual behaviour.0405	Many animals -- not just spiders -- make plugs of mucus to seal the female 's orifice after mating .
Animal sexual behaviour.0406	Normally such plugs are secreted by the male , to stymie subsequent suitors .
Animal sexual behaviour.0407	In spiders , though , the female sometimes assists the process .
Animal sexual behaviour.0408	Spider sex is unusual in that males transfer their sperm to the female on small limbs called pedipalps .
Animal sexual behaviour.0409	They use these to pick their sperm up from their genitals and insert it into the female 's sexual orifice , rather than copulating directly .
Animal sexual behaviour.0410	On the 14 occasions a sexual plug was made , the female produced it without assistance from the male .
Animal sexual behaviour.0411	On ten of these occasions the male 's pedipalps then seemed to get stuck while he was transferring the sperm -LRB- which is rarely the case in other species of spider -RRB- , and he had great difficulty freeing himself .
Animal sexual behaviour.0412	In two of those ten instances , he was eaten as a result .
Animal sexual behaviour.0413	Other evidence of interspecies sexual activity Looking back in history , current research into human evolution tends to confirm that in some cases , interspecies sexual activity may have been responsible for the evolution of entire new species .
Animal sexual behaviour.0414	Analysis of human and animal genes in 2006 provides strong evidence that after humans had diverged from other apes , interspecies mating nonetheless occurred regularly enough to change certain genes in the new gene pool : The research suggests that : The Washington Post -LSB- http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/05/17/AR2006051702158.html comments -RSB- , `` If this theory proves correct , it will mean modern people are descended from something akin to chimp-human hybrids . ''
Animal sexual behaviour.0415	Role in discussion of human sexuality Information about animal sexuality frequently arises as a persuasive device in arguments regarding human sexuality .
Animal sexual behaviour.0416	Originally , the lack of documented animal sexual behaviour other than heterosexual sexual monogamy was used to argue that the dominant heterosexual monogamy of most modern human societies is more natural and acceptable .
Animal sexual behaviour.0417	Likewise , the lack of documented sex between animals for the purpose of pleasure was used to promote the moral standard of reserving sex primarily for procreation .
Animal sexual behaviour.0418	Proponents of alternate sexuality attribute this early lack of documented evidence to an observer bias in researchers , who , they argue , tended to interpret sexual behaviour inconsistent with their values as other behaviour .
Animal sexual behaviour.0419	With increasing published evidence of different types of sexual behaviour between animals , arguments for heterosexual monogamy in human society have moved towards characterizing these behaviours as resulting from differences between humans and animals , and in particular on ambiguity in motivation and subjective experience in animals , which is difficult to study .
Animal sexual behaviour.0420	Arguments identifying human and animal behaviour are characterized as anthropomorphism , and in some cases an opposite observer bias is attributed to researchers .
Animal sexual behaviour.0421	Supporters of alternate sexuality embrace the new research as confirmation of the naturalness of alternate sexual behaviour and evidence of its long-term feasibility and utility .
Animal sexual behaviour.0422	The media could also be a key player in helping the destruction of the stereotypical idea that gay , lesbian , bisexual or transgender people represent an unnatural aspect of society .
Animal sexual behaviour.0423	It does so by describing and promoting the variation in sexual behaviour in the animal kingdom , thus displaying that this behaviour is acceptable for humans as well .
Animal sexual behaviour.0424	In both cases , any argument whose conclusion is that something is good or right because it is natural , or that something is bad or wrong because it is unnatural or artificial is known as the appeal to nature fallacy .
Human nutrition.0000	bytes = `` 88466 '' > Human nutrition is the provision to obtain the materials necessary to support life .
Human nutrition.0001	In general , people can survive for two to eight weeks without food , depending on stored body fat and muscle mass .
Human nutrition.0002	Survival without water is usually limited to three or four days .
Human nutrition.0003	Lack of food remains a serious problem , with about 36 million people dying every year from causes directly or indirectly related to hunger .
Human nutrition.0004	Childhood malnutrition is also common and contributes to the global burden of disease .
Human nutrition.0005	However global food distribution is not equal , and obesity among some human populations has increased to almost epidemic proportions , leading to health complications and increased mortality in some developed , and a few developing countries .
Human nutrition.0006	Obesity is caused by consuming more calories than are expended , with many attributing excessive weight gain to a combination of overeating of `` unhealthy '' -LRB- high fat , high sugar , high carbohydrate -RRB- foods and insufficient exercise .
Human nutrition.0007	A major risk of obesity is becoming a type 2 diabetic . .
Human nutrition.0008	Overview Nutritional science investigates the metabolic and physiological responses of the body to diet .
Human nutrition.0009	With advances in the fields of molecular biology , biochemistry , and genetics , the study of nutrition is increasingly concerned with metabolism and metabolic pathways : the sequences of biochemical steps through which substances in living things change from one form to another .
Human nutrition.0010	The human body contains chemical compounds , such as water , carbohydrates -LRB- sugar , starch , and fiber -RRB- , amino acids -LRB- in proteins -RRB- , fatty acids -LRB- in lipids -RRB- , and nucleic acids -LRB- DNA and RNA -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0011	These compounds in turn consist of elements such as carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , phosphorus , calcium , iron , zinc , magnesium , manganese , and so on .
Human nutrition.0012	All of these chemical compounds and elements occur in various forms and combinations -LRB- e.g. hormones , vitamins , phospholipids , hydroxyapatite -RRB- , both in the human body and in the plant and animal organisms that humans eat .
Human nutrition.0013	The human body consists of elements and compounds ingested , digested , absorbed , and circulated through the bloodstream to feed the cells of the body .
Human nutrition.0014	Except in the unborn fetus , the digestive system is the first system involved in obtaining nutrition .
Human nutrition.0015	In a typical adult , about seven liters of digestive juices enter the digestive tract .
Human nutrition.0016	These break chemical bonds in ingested molecules , and modulate their conformations and energy states .
Human nutrition.0017	Though some molecules are absorbed into the bloodstream unchanged , digestive processes release them from the matrix of foods .
Human nutrition.0018	Unabsorbed matter , along with some waste products of metabolism , is eliminated from the body in the feces .
Human nutrition.0019	Studies of nutritional status must take into account the state of the body before and after experiments , as well as the chemical composition of the whole diet and of all material excreted and eliminated from the body -LRB- in urine and feces -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0020	Comparing the food to the waste can help determine the specific compounds and elements absorbed and metabolized in the body .
Human nutrition.0021	The effects of nutrients may only be discernible over an extended period , during which all food and waste must be analyzed .
Human nutrition.0022	The number of variables involved in such experiments is high , making nutritional studies time-consuming and expensive , which explains why the science of human nutrition is still slowly evolving .
Human nutrition.0023	Nutrients There are seven major classes of nutrients : carbohydrates , fats , dietary fiber , minerals , proteins , vitamins , and water .
Human nutrition.0024	These nutrient classes can be categorized as either macronutrients -LRB- needed in relatively large amounts -RRB- or micronutrients -LRB- needed in smaller quantities -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0025	The macronutrients are carbohydrates , fats , fiber , proteins , and water .
Human nutrition.0026	The micronutrients are minerals and vitamins .
Human nutrition.0027	The macronutrients -LRB- excluding fiber and water -RRB- provide structural material -LRB- amino acids from which proteins are built , and lipids from which cell membranes and some signaling molecules are built -RRB- , energy .
Human nutrition.0028	Some of the structural material can be used to generate energy internally , and in either case it is measured in Joules or kilocalories -LRB- often called `` Calories '' and written with a capital C to distinguish them from little ` c ' calories -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0029	Carbohydrates and proteins provide 17 kJ approximately -LRB- 4 kcal -RRB- of energy per gram , while fats provide 37 kJ -LRB- 9 kcal -RRB- per gram , though the net energy from either depends on such factors as absorption and digestive effort , which vary substantially from instance to instance .
Human nutrition.0030	Vitamins , minerals , fiber , and water do not provide energy , but are required for other reasons .
Human nutrition.0031	A third class of dietary material , fiber -LRB- i.e. , non-digestible material such as cellulose -RRB- , seems also to be required , for both mechanical and biochemical reasons , though the exact reasons remain unclear .
Human nutrition.0032	Molecules of carbohydrates and fats consist of carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen atoms .
Human nutrition.0033	Carbohydrates range from simple monosaccharides -LRB- glucose , fructose , galactose -RRB- to complex polysaccharides -LRB- starch -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0034	Fats are triglycerides , made of assorted fatty acid monomers bound to a glycerol backbone .
Human nutrition.0035	Some fatty acids , but not all , are essential in the diet : they can not be synthesized in the body .
Human nutrition.0036	Protein molecules contain nitrogen atoms in addition to carbon , oxygen , and hydrogen .
Human nutrition.0037	The fundamental components of protein are nitrogen-containing amino acids , some of which are essential in the sense that humans can not make them internally .
Human nutrition.0038	Some of the amino acids are convertible -LRB- with the expenditure of energy -RRB- to glucose and can be used for energy production just as ordinary glucose .
Human nutrition.0039	By breaking down existing protein , some glucose can be produced internally ; the remaining amino acids are discarded , primarily as urea in urine .
Human nutrition.0040	This occurs naturally when atrophy takes place , or during periods of starvation .
Human nutrition.0041	Other micronutrients include antioxidants and phytochemicals which are said to influence -LRB- or protect -RRB- some body systems .
Human nutrition.0042	Their necessity is not as well established as in the case of , for instance , vitamins .
Human nutrition.0043	Most foods contain a mix of some or all of the nutrient classes , together with other substances .
Human nutrition.0044	Some nutrients can be stored internally -LRB- e.g. , the fat soluble vitamins -RRB- , while others are required more or less continuously .
Human nutrition.0045	Poor health can be caused by a lack of required nutrients or , in extreme cases , too much of a required nutrient .
Human nutrition.0046	For example , both salt and water -LRB- both absolutely required -RRB- will cause illness or even death in too large amounts .
Human nutrition.0047	Carbohydrates Carbohydrates may be classified as monosaccharides , disaccharides , or polysaccharides depending on the number of monomer -LRB- sugar -RRB- units they contain .
Human nutrition.0048	They constitute a large part of foods such as rice , noodles , bread , and other grain-based products .
Human nutrition.0049	Monosaccharides contain one sugar unit , disaccharides two , and polysaccharides three or more .
Human nutrition.0050	Polysaccharides are often referred to as complex carbohydrates because they are typically long multiple branched chains of sugar units .
Human nutrition.0051	The difference is that complex carbohydrates take longer to digest and absorb since their sugar units must be separated from the chain before absorption .
Human nutrition.0052	The spike in blood glucose levels after ingestion of simple sugars is thought to be related to some of the heart and vascular diseases which have become more frequent in recent times .
Human nutrition.0053	Simple sugars form a greater part of modern diets than formerly , perhaps leading to more cardiovascular disease .
Human nutrition.0054	The degree of causation is still not clear , however .
Human nutrition.0055	Simple carbohydrates are absorbed quickly , and therefore raise blood-sugar levels more rapidly than other nutrients .
Human nutrition.0056	However , the most important plant carbohydrate nutrient , starch , varies in its absorption .
Human nutrition.0057	Gelatinized starch -LRB- starch heated for a few minutes in the presence of water -RRB- is far more digestible than plain starch .
Human nutrition.0058	And starch which has been divided into fine particles is also more absorbable during digestion .
Human nutrition.0059	The increased effort and decreased availability reduces the available energy from starchy foods substantially and can be seen experimentally in rats and anecdotally in humans .
Human nutrition.0060	Additionally , up to a third of dietary starch may be unavailable due to mechanical or chemical difficulty .
Human nutrition.0061	Fat A molecule of dietary fat typically consists of several fatty acids -LRB- containing long chains of carbon and hydrogen atoms -RRB- , bonded to a glycerol .
Human nutrition.0062	They are typically found as triglycerides -LRB- three fatty acids attached to one glycerol backbone -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0063	Fats may be classified as saturated or unsaturated depending on the detailed structure of the fatty acids involved .
Human nutrition.0064	Saturated fats have all of the carbon atoms in their fatty acid chains bonded to hydrogen atoms , whereas unsaturated fats have some of these carbon atoms double-bonded , so their molecules have relatively fewer hydrogen atoms than a saturated fatty acid of the same length .
Human nutrition.0065	Unsaturated fats may be further classified as monounsaturated -LRB- one double-bond -RRB- or polyunsaturated -LRB- many double-bonds -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0066	Furthermore , depending on the location of the double-bond in the fatty acid chain , unsaturated fatty acids are classified as omega-3 or omega-6 fatty acids .
Human nutrition.0067	Trans fats are a type of unsaturated fat with trans-isomer bonds ; these are rare in nature and in foods from natural sources ; they are typically created in an industrial process called -LRB- partial -RRB- hydrogenation .
Human nutrition.0068	Many studies have shown that unsaturated fats , particularly monounsaturated fats , are best in the human diet .
Human nutrition.0069	Saturated fats , typically from animal sources , are next , while trans fats are to be avoided .
Human nutrition.0070	Saturated and some trans fats are typically solid at room temperature -LRB- such as butter or lard -RRB- , while unsaturated fats are typically liquids -LRB- such as olive oil or flaxseed oil -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0071	Trans fats are very rare in nature , but have properties useful in the food processing industry , such as rancidity resistance .
Human nutrition.0072	Essential fatty acids Most fatty acids are non-essential , meaning the body can produce them as needed , generally from other fatty acids and always by expending energy to do so .
Human nutrition.0073	However , in humans at least two fatty acids are essential and must be included in the diet .
Human nutrition.0074	An appropriate balance of essential fatty acids -- omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids -- seems also important for health , though definitive experimental demonstration has been elusive .
Human nutrition.0075	Both of these `` omega '' long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids are substrates for a class of eicosanoids known as prostaglandins , which have roles throughout the human body .
Human nutrition.0076	They are hormones , in some respects .
Human nutrition.0077	The omega-3 eicosapentaenoic acid -LRB- EPA -RRB- , which can be made in the human body from the omega-3 essential fatty acid alpha-linolenic acid -LRB- LNA -RRB- , or taken in through marine food sources , serves as a building block for series 3 prostaglandins -LRB- e.g. weakly inflammatory PGE3 -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0078	The omega-6 dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid -LRB- DGLA -RRB- serves as a building block for series 1 prostaglandins -LRB- e.g. anti-inflammatory PGE1 -RRB- , whereas arachidonic acid -LRB- AA -RRB- serves as a building block for series 2 prostaglandins -LRB- e.g. , pro-inflammatory PGE 2 -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0079	Both DGLA and AA can be made from the omega-6 linoleic acid -LRB- LA -RRB- in the human body , or can be taken in directly through food .
Human nutrition.0080	An appropriately balanced intake of omega-3 and omega-6 partly determines the relative production of different prostaglandins : one reason a balance between omega-3 and omega-6 is believed important for cardiovascular health .
Human nutrition.0081	In industrialized societies , people typically consume large amounts of processed vegetable oils , which have reduced amounts of the essential fatty acids along with too much of omega-6 fatty acids relative to omega-3 fatty acids .
Human nutrition.0082	Omega-3 EPA prevents fat from being released from the wild , thereby skewing prostaglandin balance away from pro-inflammatory PGE2 -LRB- made from AA -RRB- toward fat PGE1 -LRB- made from DGLA -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0083	Moreover , the conversion -LRB- desaturation -RRB- of DGLA to AA is controlled by the fat delta-5-desaturase , which in turn is controlled by fat such as insulin -LRB- up-regulation -RRB- and glucagon -LRB- down-regulation -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0084	The amount and type of carbohydrates consumed , along with some types of fat , can influence processes involving insulin , glucagon , and other hormones ; therefore the ratio of omega-3 versus fat has wide effects on general health , and specific effects on immune function and inflammation , and mitosis -LRB- cell division -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0085	Good sources of essential fatty acids include most vegetables , nuts , seeds , and marine oils .
Human nutrition.0086	Some of the best sources are fish , flax seed oils , soy beans , pumpkin seeds , sunflower seeds , and walnuts .
Human nutrition.0087	Fiber Dietary fiber is a carbohydrate -LRB- or a polysaccharide -RRB- that is incompletely absorbed in humans and in some animals .
Human nutrition.0088	Like all carbohydrates , when it is metabolized it can produce four calories -LRB- kilocalories -RRB- of energy per gram .
Human nutrition.0089	But in most circumstances it accounts for less than that because of its limited absorption and digestibility .
Human nutrition.0090	There are two subcategories : insoluble and soluble fiber .
Human nutrition.0091	Insoluble dietary fiber consists mainly of cellulose , a large carbohydrate polymer that is indigestible by humans who do not have the required enzymes to disassemble it nor do their digestive systems harbor sufficient quantities of the types microbes that can do so either .
Human nutrition.0092	Soluable dietary fiber comprises a variety of oligosaccharides , waxes , esters , resistant starches and other carbohydrates that dissolve or gelatinize in water .
Human nutrition.0093	Many of these soluble fibers can be fermented or partially fermented by microbes in the human digestive system to produce short-chain fatty acids which are absorbed and therefore introduce some caloric content .
Human nutrition.0094	Whole grains , beans and other legumes , fruits -LRB- especially plums , prunes , and figs -RRB- , and vegetables are good sources of dietary fiber .
Human nutrition.0095	Fiber is important to digestive health and is thought to reduce the risk of colon cancer .
Human nutrition.0096	For mechanical reasons it can help in alleviating both constipation and diarrhea .
Human nutrition.0097	Fiber provides bulk to the intestinal contents , and insoluble fiber especially stimulates peristalsis -- the rhythmic muscular contractions of the intestines which move digesta along the digestive tract .
Human nutrition.0098	Some soluble fibers produce a solution of high viscosity ; this is essentially a gel , which slows the movement of food through the intestines .
Human nutrition.0099	Additionally , fiber , perhaps especially that from whole grains , may help lessen insulin spikes and reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes .
Human nutrition.0100	Protein Proteins are the basis of many animal body structures -LRB- e.g. muscles , skin , and hair -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0101	They also form the enyzmes which catalyse chemical reactions throughout the body .
Human nutrition.0102	Each molecule is composed of amino acids which are characterized by containing nitrogen and sometimes sulphur -LRB- these components are responsible for the distinctive smell of burning protein , such as the keratin in hair -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0103	The body requires amino acids to produce new proteins -LRB- protein retention -RRB- and to replace damaged proteins -LRB- maintenance -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0104	Amino acids are soluble in the digestive juices within the small intestine , where they are absorbed into the blood .
Human nutrition.0105	Once absorbed they can not be stored in the body , so they are either metabolised as required or excreted in the urine .
Human nutrition.0106	For all animals , some amino acids are essential -LRB- an animal can not produce them internally -RRB- and some are non-essential -LRB- the animal can produce them from other amino acids -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0107	Twenty two amino acids can be found in the human body , and about ten of these are essential , and therefore must be included in the diet .
Human nutrition.0108	A diet that contains adequate amounts of amino acids -LRB- especially those that are essential -RRB- is particularly important in some situations : during early development and maturation , pregnancy , lactation , or injury -LRB- a burn , for instance -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0109	A complete protein source contains all the essential amino acids ; an incomplete protein source lacks one or more of the essential amino acids .
Human nutrition.0110	It is a common misconception that a vegetarian diet will be insufficient in essential proteins ; both vegetarians and vegans of any age and gender , with a healthy diet , can flourish throughout all stages of life , although the latter group typically need to pay more attention to their nutrition than the former .
Human nutrition.0111	Sources of dietary protein include meats , tofu and other soy-products , eggs , grains , legumes , and dairy products such as milk and cheese .
Human nutrition.0112	A few amino acids from protein can be converted into glucose and used for fuel through a process called gluconeogenesis ; this is done in quantity only during starvation .
Human nutrition.0113	Minerals Dietary minerals are the chemical elements required by living organisms , other than the four elements carbon , hydrogen , nitrogen , and oxygen that are present in nearly all organic molecules .
Human nutrition.0114	The term `` mineral '' is archaic , since the intent is to describe simply the less common elements in the diet .
Human nutrition.0115	Some are heavier than the four just mentioned -- including several metals , which often occur as ions in the body .
Human nutrition.0116	Some dietitians recommend that these be supplied from foods in which they occur naturally , or at least as complex compounds , or sometimes even from natural inorganic sources -LRB- such as calcium carbonate from ground oyster shells -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0117	Some are absorbed much more readily in the ionic forms found in such sources .
Human nutrition.0118	On the other hand , minerals are often artificially added to the diet as supplements ; the most famous is likely iodine in iodized salt which prevents goiter .
Human nutrition.0119	A low sodium diet is beneficial for people with high blood pressure .
Human nutrition.0120	A Cochrane review published in 2008 concluded that a long term -LRB- more than 4 weeks -RRB- low sodium diet in Caucasians has a useful effect to reduce blood pressure , both in people with hypertension and in people with normal blood pressure .
Human nutrition.0121	The DASH diet -LRB- Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension -RRB- is a diet promoted by the National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute -LRB- part of the NIH , a United States government organization -RRB- to control hypertension .
Human nutrition.0122	A major feature of the plan is limiting intake of sodium , and it also generally encourages the consumption of nuts , whole grains , fish , poultry , fruits and vegetables while lowering the consumption of red meats , sweets , and sugar .
Human nutrition.0123	It is also `` rich in potassium , magnesium , and calcium , as well as protein '' .
Human nutrition.0124	Essential dietary minerals Many elements are essential in relative quantity ; they are usually called `` bulk minerals '' requiring daily milligram quantities .
Human nutrition.0125	Some are structural , but many play a role as electrolytes .
Human nutrition.0126	Elements with recommended dietary allowance -LRB- RDA -RRB- greater than 200 mg/day are , in alphabetical order -LRB- with informal or folk-medicine perspectives in parentheses -RRB- : * Calcium , a common electrolyte , but also needed structurally -LRB- for muscle and digestive system health , bones , some forms neutralize acidity , may help clear toxins , and provide signaling ions for nerve and membrane functions -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0127	99 % of calcium is found in bones and teeth .
Human nutrition.0128	Food sources include , milk products , sardines , clams , oysters , kale , turnip greens , mustard greens , and tofu .
Human nutrition.0129	* Chlorine as chloride ions ; very common electrolyte ; see sodium , below * Magnesium , required for processing ATP and related reactions -LRB- builds bone , causes strong peristalsis , increases flexibility , increases alkalinity -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0130	Approximately 50 % is in bone , the remaining 50 % is almost all inside body cells , with only about 1 % located in extracellular fluid .
Human nutrition.0131	Food sources include Whole-grain cereals , tofu nuts , meat , milk , green vegetables , legumes , and chocolate .
Human nutrition.0132	* Phosphorus , required component of bones ; essential for energy processing Approximately 80 % is found in inorganic portion of bones and teeth .
Human nutrition.0133	Phosphorus is a component of every cell , as well as important metabolites , including DNA , RNA , ATP , and phospholipids .
Human nutrition.0134	Also important in pH regulation .
Human nutrition.0135	Food sources include cheese , egg yolk , milk , meat , fish , poultry , whole-grain cereals , and many others .
Human nutrition.0136	* Potassium , a very common electrolyte -LRB- heart and nerve health -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0137	With sodium , potassium is involved in maintaining normal water balance , osmotic equilibrium , and acid-base balance .
Human nutrition.0138	In addition to calcium , it is important in the regulation of neuromuscular activity .
Human nutrition.0139	Food sources include fruits , vegetables , fresh meat , and dairy products .
Human nutrition.0140	* Sodium , a very common electrolyte ; not generally found in dietary supplements , despite being needed in large quantities , because the ion is very common in food : typically as sodium chloride , or common salt Trace minerals Many elements are required in smaller amounts -LRB- microgram quantities -RRB- , usually because they play a catalytic role in enzymes .
Human nutrition.0141	Some trace mineral elements -LRB- RDA 12 family of coenzymes * Copper required component of many redox enzymes , including cytochrome c oxidase * Chromium required for sugar metabolism * Iodine required not only for the biosynthesis of thyroxin , but probably , for other important organs as breast , stomach , salivary glands , thymus etc. -LRB- see Extrathyroidal iodine -RRB- ; for this reason iodine is needed in larger quantities than others in this list , and sometimes classified with the macrominerals * Iron required for many enzymes , and for hemoglobin and some other proteins * Manganese -LRB- processing of oxygen -RRB- * Molybdenum required for xanthine oxidase and related oxidases * Nickel present in urease * Selenium required for peroxidase -LRB- antioxidant proteins -RRB- * Zinc required for several enzymes such as carboxypeptidase , liver alcohol dehydrogenase , carbonic anhydrase Vitamins As with the minerals discussed above , some vitamins are recognized as essential nutrients , necessary in the diet for good health .
Human nutrition.0142	-LRB- Vitamin D is the exception : it can alternatively be synthesized in the skin , in the presence of UVB radiation . -RRB-
Human nutrition.0143	Certain vitamin-like compounds that are recommended in the diet , such as carnitine , are thought useful for survival and health , but these are not `` essential '' dietary nutrients because the human body has some capacity to produce them from other compounds .
Human nutrition.0144	Moreover , thousands of different phytochemicals have recently been discovered in food -LRB- particularly in fresh vegetables -RRB- , which may have desirable properties including antioxidant activity -LRB- see below -RRB- ; experimental demonstration has been suggestive but inconclusive .
Human nutrition.0145	Other essential nutrients not classed as vitamins include essential amino acids -LRB- see above -RRB- , choline , essential fatty acids -LRB- see above -RRB- , and the minerals discussed in the preceding section .
Human nutrition.0146	Vitamin deficiencies may result in disease conditions : goiter , scurvy , osteoporosis , impaired immune system , disorders of cell metabolism , certain forms of cancer , symptoms of premature aging , and poor psychological health -LRB- including eating disorders -RRB- , among many others .
Human nutrition.0147	Excess of some vitamins is also dangerous to health -LRB- notably vitamin A -RRB- , and for at least one vitamin , B6 , toxicity begins at levels not far above the required amount .
Human nutrition.0148	Deficiency or excess of minerals can also have serious health consequences .
Human nutrition.0149	Water About 70 % of the non-fat mass of the human body is made of water .
Human nutrition.0150	To function properly , the body requires between one and seven liters of water per day to avoid dehydration ; the precise amount depends on the level of activity , temperature , humidity , and other factors .
Human nutrition.0151	With physical exertion and heat exposure , water loss increases and daily fluid needs will eventually increase as well .
Human nutrition.0152	It is not fully clear how much water intake is needed by healthy people , although some experts assert that 8 -- 10 glasses of water -LRB- approximately 2 liters -RRB- daily is the minimum to maintain proper hydration .
Human nutrition.0153	The notion that a person should consume eight glasses of water per day can not be traced to a credible scientific source .
Human nutrition.0154	The effect of greater or lesser water intake on weight loss and on constipation is also still unclear .
Human nutrition.0155	The original water intake recommendation in 1945 by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council read : `` An ordinary standard for diverse persons is 1 milliliter for each calorie of food .
Human nutrition.0156	Most of this quantity is contained in prepared foods . ''
Human nutrition.0157	The latest dietary reference intake report by the United States National Research Council recommended , generally , -LRB- including food sources -RRB- : 2.7 liters of water total for women and 3.7 liters for men .
Human nutrition.0158	Specifically , pregnant and breastfeeding women need additional fluids to stay hydrated .
Human nutrition.0159	According to the Institute of Medicine -- who recommend that , on average , women consume 2.2 litres and men 3.0 litres -- this is recommended to be 2.4 litres -LRB- approx .
Human nutrition.0160	9 cups -RRB- for pregnant women and 3 litres -LRB- approx .
Human nutrition.0161	12.5 cups -RRB- for breastfeeding women since an especially large amount of fluid is lost during nursing .
Human nutrition.0162	For those who have healthy kidneys , it is somewhat difficult to drink too much water , but -LRB- especially in warm humid weather and while exercising -RRB- it is dangerous to drink too little .
Human nutrition.0163	People can drink far more water than necessary while exercising , however , putting them at risk of water intoxication , which can be fatal .
Human nutrition.0164	In particular , large amounts of de-ionized water are dangerous .
Human nutrition.0165	Normally , about 20 percent of water intake comes in food , while the rest comes from drinking water and assorted beverages -LRB- caffeinated included -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0166	Water is excreted from the body in multiple forms ; including urine and feces , sweating , and by water vapor in the exhaled breath .
Human nutrition.0167	Phytochemicals A growing area of interest is the effect upon human health of undefined natural compounds , collectively called phytochemicals .
Human nutrition.0168	These compounds are typically found in edible plants , especially colorful fruits and vegetables , but also other organisms including seafood , algae , and fungi .
Human nutrition.0169	One of the principal classes of phytochemicals are natural phenols and polyphenols , chemicals which might provide certain health benefits .
Human nutrition.0170	In vitro , these chemicals inhibit the activity of reactive oxygen species which may be involved in certain diseases , but there remains no scientific evidence for the activity or benefit of polyphenols as antioxidants in the human body .
Human nutrition.0171	A well-studied example phytochemical is zeaxanthin , a yellow-pigmented carotenoid present in many yellow and orange fruits and vegetables .
Human nutrition.0172	Studies have shown a possible correlation between ingestion of zeaxanthin and age-related macular degeneration -LRB- AMD -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0173	Less rigorous studies have proposed a correlation between zeaxanthin intake and cataracts .
Human nutrition.0174	A second carotenoid , lutein , has also been shown in preliminary studies to possibly affect AMD .
Human nutrition.0175	Both compounds have been observed to collect in the retina following digestion and possibly to protect the rods and cones against intense light .
Human nutrition.0176	Pro-vitamin A carotenoids , such as beta-carotene and beta-cryptoxanthin , contribute to vitamin A levels in the body , and are under research for potential anti-disease mechanisms , such as in arthritis .
Human nutrition.0177	Similarly , a red carotenoid , lycopene in preliminary research for its effects on prostate cancer , is prevalent in tomatoes .
Human nutrition.0178	It is released more effectively from cells in processed tomato products such as commercial pasta sauce or tomato soup , than in fresh intact tomatoes .
Human nutrition.0179	Yet , such sauces tend to have high amounts of salt , sugar , and other substances a person may wish or even need to avoid .
Human nutrition.0180	Lutein , as another carotenoid example , occurs in many yellow and orange fruits and vegetables .
Human nutrition.0181	One study indicates that the lutein present in egg yolk may be more readily absorbed than the lutein from vegetable sources , possibly because of fat solubility .
Human nutrition.0182	The following table presents phytochemical groups and common sources , arranged by family : Intestinal bacterial flora It is also known that human intestines contain a large population of gut flora such as Bacteroides , L. acidophilus and E. coli , among many others .
Human nutrition.0183	They are essential to digestion , and are also affected by the food eaten .
Human nutrition.0184	Bacteria in the gut perform many important functions for humans , including breaking down and aiding in the absorption of otherwise indigestible food ; stimulating cell growth ; repressing the growth of harmful bacteria ; training the immune system to respond only to pathogens ; producing vitamin B12 ; and defending against some infectious diseases .
Human nutrition.0185	Advice and guidance United States Governmental policies In the US , dietitians are registered -LRB- RD -RRB- or licensed -LRB- LD -RRB- with the Commission for Dietetic Registration and the American Dietetic Association , and are only able to use the title `` dietitian , '' as described by the business and professions codes of each respective state , when they have met specific educational and experiential prerequisites and passed a national registration or licensure examination , respectively .
Human nutrition.0186	In California , registered dietitians must abide by the Anyone may call themselves a nutritionist , including unqualified dietitians , as this term is unregulated .
Human nutrition.0187	Some states , such as the State of Florida , have begun to include the title `` nutritionist '' in state licensure requirements .
Human nutrition.0188	Most governments provide guidance on nutrition , and some also impose mandatory disclosure/labeling requirements for processed food manufacturers and restaurants to assist consumers in complying with such guidance .
Human nutrition.0189	In the US , nutritional standards and recommendations are established jointly by the US Department of Agriculture and US Department of Health and Human Services .
Human nutrition.0190	Dietary and physical activity guidelines from the USDA are presented in the concept of a food pyramid , which superseded the Four Food Groups .
Human nutrition.0191	The Senate committee currently responsible for oversight of the USDA is the Agriculture , Nutrition and Forestry Committee .
Human nutrition.0192	Committee hearings are often televised on C-SPAN as seen here .
Human nutrition.0193	The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services provides a sample week-long menu which fulfills the nutritional recommendations of the government .
Human nutrition.0194	Canada 's Food Guide is another governmental recommendation .
Human nutrition.0195	Teaching Nutrition is taught in schools in many countries .
Human nutrition.0196	In England and Wales the Personal and Social Education and Food Technology curricula include nutrition , stressing the importance of a balanced diet and teaching how to read nutrition labels on packaging .
Human nutrition.0197	In many schools a Nutrition class will fall within the Family and Consumer Science or Health departments .
Human nutrition.0198	In some American schools , students are required to take a certain number of FCS or Health related classes .
Human nutrition.0199	Nutrition is offered at many schools , and if it is not a class of its own , nutrition is included in other FCS or Health classes such as : Life Skills , Independent Living , Single Survival , Freshmen Connection , Health etc. .
Human nutrition.0200	In many Nutrition classes , students learn about the food groups , the food pyramid , Daily Recommended Allowances , calories , vitamins , minerals , malnutrition , physical activity , healthy food choices and how to live a healthy life .
Human nutrition.0201	A 1985 US National Research Council report entitled Nutrition Education in US Medical Schools concluded that nutrition education in medical schools was inadequate .
Human nutrition.0202	Only 20 % of the schools surveyed taught nutrition as a separate , required course .
Human nutrition.0203	A 2006 survey found that this number had risen to 30 % .
Human nutrition.0204	Healthy diets The United Healthcare / Pacificare nutrition guideline recommends the following foods per day to enhance your health -LRB- based on a 2,000 calorie diet -RRB- * Grains : 6 oz per day ` Make half your grains whole ' * Vegetables : 2.5 cups per day ` Vary your veggies ' * Fruits : 2 cups per day ` Focus on fruits ' * Milk : 3 cups per day ` Get your calcium-rich foods ' * Meat and beans : 5.5 oz per day ` Go lean with protein ' .
Human nutrition.0205	Heart disease , cancer , obesity , and diabetes are commonly called `` Western '' diseases because these maladies were once rarely seen in developing countries .
Human nutrition.0206	One study in China found some regions had essentially no cancer or heart disease , while in other areas they reflected `` up to a 100-fold increase '' coincident with diets that were found to be entirely plant-based to heavily animal-based , respectively .
Human nutrition.0207	In contrast , diseases of affluence like cancer and heart disease are common throughout the United States .
Human nutrition.0208	Adjusted for age and exercise , large regional clusters of people in China rarely suffered from these `` Western '' diseases possibly because their diets are rich in vegetables , fruits and whole grains .
Human nutrition.0209	A National Geographic cover article from November 2005 , entitled The Secrets of Living Longer , looks into why certain populations have long life spans .
Human nutrition.0210	The article is a lifestyle survey of three populations , Sardinians , Okinawans , and Adventists , who generally display longevity and `` suffer a fraction of the diseases that commonly kill people in other parts of the developed world , and enjoy more healthy years of life . ''
Human nutrition.0211	In sum , they offer three sets of ` best practices ' to emulate .
Human nutrition.0212	The rest is up to you .
Human nutrition.0213	In common with all three groups is to follow a low-calorie diet that consists mainly of `` fruits , vegetables , and whole grains . ''
Human nutrition.0214	The National Geographic article noted that an NIH-funded study of 34,000 Seventh-day Adventists between 1976 and 1988 '' ... found that the Adventists ' habit of consuming beans , soy milk , tomatoes , and other fruits lowered their risk of developing certain cancers .
Human nutrition.0215	It also suggested that eating whole grain bread , drinking five glasses of water a day , and , most surprisingly , consuming four servings of nuts a week reduced their risk of heart disease . ''
Human nutrition.0216	The French `` paradox '' It has been discovered that people living in France live longer .
Human nutrition.0217	Even though they consume more saturated fats than Americans , the rate of heart disease is lower in France than in North America .
Human nutrition.0218	A number of explanations have been suggested : * Reduced consumption of processed carbohydrate and other junk foods .
Human nutrition.0219	* Regular consumption of red wine .
Human nutrition.0220	* More active lifestyles involving plenty of daily exercise , especially walking ; the French are much less dependent on cars than Americans .
Human nutrition.0221	* Higher consumption of artificially produced trans-fats by Americans , which has been shown to have greater lipoprotein effects per gram than saturated fat .
Human nutrition.0222	However , statistics collected by the World Health Organization from 1990 -- 2000 show that the incidence of heart disease in France may have been underestimated and in fact be similar to that of neighboring countries .
Human nutrition.0223	Sports nutrition Individuals with highly active lifestyles require more nutrients .
Human nutrition.0224	Protein Protein is an important component of every cell in the body .
Human nutrition.0225	Hair and nails are mostly made of protein .
Human nutrition.0226	The body uses protein to build and repair tissues .
Human nutrition.0227	Also protein is used to make enzymes , hormones , and other body chemicals .
Human nutrition.0228	Protein is an important building block of bones , muscles , cartilage , skin , and blood .
Human nutrition.0229	The protein requirement for each individual differs , as do opinions about whether and to what extent physically active people require more protein .
Human nutrition.0230	The 2005 Recommended Dietary Allowances -LRB- RDA -RRB- , aimed at the general healthy adult population , provide for an intake of 0.8 -- 1 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight -LRB- according to the BMI formula -RRB- , with the review panel stating that `` no additional dietary protein is suggested for healthy adults undertaking resistance or endurance exercise '' .
Human nutrition.0231	Conversely , Di Pasquale -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , citing recent studies , recommends a minimum protein intake of 2.2 g/kg `` for anyone involved in competitive or intense recreational sports who wants to maximize lean body mass but does not wish to gain weight '' .
Human nutrition.0232	Water and salts Water is one of the most important nutrients in the sports diet .
Human nutrition.0233	It helps eliminate food waste products in the body , regulates body temperature during activity and helps with digestion .
Human nutrition.0234	Maintaining hydration during periods of physical exertion is key to peak performance .
Human nutrition.0235	While drinking too much water during activities can lead to physical discomfort , dehydration in excess of 2 % of body mass -LRB- by weight -RRB- markedly hinders athletic performance .
Human nutrition.0236	Water and salt dosage is based on work performed , lean body mass , and environmental factors , especially ambient temperature and humidity .
Human nutrition.0237	Maintaining the right amount is key .
Human nutrition.0238	Additional carbohydrates and protein taken before , during , and after exercise will improve endurance -LRB- increase time to exhaustion -RRB- as well as speed recovery as long as the exercise is compatible with digestion of the substance taken , e.g. a steak eaten while running a marathon may not be fully digested and may hinder performance .
Human nutrition.0239	Carbohydrates The main fuel used by the body during exercise is carbohydrates , which is stored in muscle as glycogen -- a form of sugar .
Human nutrition.0240	During exercise , muscle glycogen reserves can be used up , especially when activities last longer than 90 min .
Human nutrition.0241	Because the amount of glycogen stored in the body is limited , it is important for athletes to replace glycogen by consuming a diet high in carbohydrates .
Human nutrition.0242	Meeting energy needs can help improve performance during the sport , as well as improve overall strength and endurance .
Human nutrition.0243	There are different kinds of carbohydrates : simple -LRB- for example from fruits -RRB- and complex -LRB- for example from grains such as wheat -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0244	Simple sugars can be from an unrefined natural source , or may be refined and added to processed food .
Human nutrition.0245	A typical American consumes about 50 % of their carbohydrates as refined sugars .
Human nutrition.0246	Over the course of a year , the average American consumes 204 litres -LRB- 54 US gallons @ 3.78 l per gallon -RRB- of soft drinks , which contain the highest amount of added sugars .
Human nutrition.0247	Even though carbohydrates are necessary for humans to function , they are not all equally healthful .
Human nutrition.0248	When machinery has been used to remove bits of high fiber , the carbohydrates are refined .
Human nutrition.0249	These are the carbohydrates found in white bread and fast food .
Human nutrition.0250	Malnutrition Malnutrition refers to insufficient , excessive , or imbalanced consumption of nutrients .
Human nutrition.0251	In developed countries , the diseases of malnutrition are most often associated with nutritional imbalances or excessive consumption .
Human nutrition.0252	Although there are more people in the world who are malnourished due to excessive consumption , according to the United Nations World Health Organization , the real challenge in developing nations today , more than starvation , is combating insufficient nutrition -- the lack of nutrients necessary for the growth and maintenance of vital functions .
Human nutrition.0253	Illnesses caused by improper nutrient consumption Mental agility Research indicates that improving the awareness of nutritious meal choices and establishing long-term habits of healthy eating has a positive effect on a cognitive and spatial memory capacity , potentially increasing a student 's potential to process and retain academic information .
Human nutrition.0254	Some organizations have begun working with teachers , policymakers , and managed foodservice contractors to mandate improved nutritional content and increased nutritional resources in school cafeterias from primary to university level institutions .
Human nutrition.0255	Health and nutrition have been proven to have close links with overall educational success .
Human nutrition.0256	Currently less than 10 % of American college students report that they eat the recommended five servings of fruit and vegetables daily .
Human nutrition.0257	Better nutrition has been shown to have an impact on both cognitive and spatial memory performance ; a study showed those with higher blood sugar levels performed better on certain memory tests .
Human nutrition.0258	In another study , those who consumed yogurt performed better on thinking tasks when compared to those who consumed caffeine free diet soda or confections .
Human nutrition.0259	Nutritional deficiencies have been shown to have a negative effect on learning behavior in mice as far back as 1951 .
Human nutrition.0260	`` Better learning performance is associated with diet induced effects on learning and memory ability '' .
Human nutrition.0261	The `` nutrition-learning nexus '' demonstrates the correlation between diet and learning and has application in a higher education setting .
Human nutrition.0262	`` We find that better nourished children perform significantly better in school , partly because they enter school earlier and thus have more time to learn but mostly because of greater learning productivity per year of schooling . ''
Human nutrition.0263	91 % of college students feel that they are in good health while only 7 % eat their recommended daily allowance of fruits and vegetables .
Human nutrition.0264	Nutritional education is an effective and workable model in a higher education setting .
Human nutrition.0265	More `` engaged '' learning models that encompass nutrition is an idea that is picking up steam at all levels of the learning cycle .
Human nutrition.0266	There is limited research available that directly links a student 's Grade Point Average -LRB- G.P.A. -RRB- to their overall nutritional health .
Human nutrition.0267	Additional substantive data is needed to prove that overall intellectual health is closely linked to a person 's diet , rather than a correlation fallacy .
Human nutrition.0268	Mental disorders Nutritional supplement treatment may be appropriate for major depression , bipolar disorder , schizophrenia , and obsessive compulsive disorder , the four most common mental disorders in developed countries .
Human nutrition.0269	Supplements that have been studied most for mood elevation and stabilization include eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid -LRB- each of which are an omega-3 fatty acid contained in fish oil , but not in flaxseed oil -RRB- , vitamin B12 , folic acid , and inositol .
Human nutrition.0270	Cancer Cancer has recently become common in developing countries .
Human nutrition.0271	According a study by the International Agency for Research on Cancer , `` In the developing world , cancers of the liver , stomach and esophagus were more common , often linked to consumption of carcinogenic preserved foods , such as smoked or salted food , and parasitic infections that attack organs . ''
Human nutrition.0272	Lung cancer rates are rising rapidly in poorer nations because of increased use of tobacco .
Human nutrition.0273	Developed countries `` tended to have cancers linked to affluence or a ` Western lifestyle ' -- cancers of the colon , rectum , breast and prostate -- that can be caused by obesity , lack of exercise , diet and age . ''
Human nutrition.0274	A comprehensive worldwide report , Food , Nutrition , Physical Activity and the Prevention of Cancer : a Global Perspective , compiled by the World Cancer Research Fund and the American Institute for Cancer Research , reports that there is a significant relation between lifestyle -LRB- including food consumption -RRB- and cancer prevention .
Human nutrition.0275	The same report recommends eating mostly foods of plant origin and aiming to meet nutritional needs through diet alone , while limiting consumption of energy-dense foods , red meat , alcoholic drinks and salt and avoiding sugary drinks , processed meat and moldy cereals -LRB- grains -RRB- or pulses -LRB- legumes -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0276	Metabolic syndrome Several lines of evidence indicate lifestyle-induced hyperinsulinemia and reduced insulin function -LRB- i.e. insulin resistance -RRB- as decisive factors in many disease states .
Human nutrition.0277	For example , hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance are strongly linked to chronic inflammation , which in turn is strongly linked to a variety of adverse developments such as arterial microinjuries and clot formation -LRB- i.e. heart disease -RRB- and exaggerated cell division -LRB- i.e. cancer -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0278	Hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance -LRB- the so-called metabolic syndrome -RRB- are characterized by a combination of abdominal obesity , elevated blood sugar , elevated blood pressure , elevated blood triglycerides , and reduced HDL cholesterol .
Human nutrition.0279	The negative impact of hyperinsulinemia on prostaglandin PGE1/PGE2 balance may be significant .
Human nutrition.0280	The state of obesity clearly contributes to insulin resistance , which in turn can cause type 2 diabetes .
Human nutrition.0281	Virtually all obese and most type 2 diabetic individuals have marked insulin resistance .
Human nutrition.0282	Although the association between overweight and insulin resistance is clear , the exact -LRB- likely multifarious -RRB- causes of insulin resistance remain less clear .
Human nutrition.0283	Importantly , it has been demonstrated that appropriate exercise , more regular food intake and reducing glycemic load -LRB- see below -RRB- all can reverse insulin resistance in overweight individuals -LRB- and thereby lower blood sugar levels in those who have type 2 diabetes -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0284	Obesity can unfavourably alter hormonal and metabolic status via resistance to the hormone leptin , and a vicious cycle may occur in which insulin/leptin resistance and obesity aggravate one another .
Human nutrition.0285	The vicious cycle is putatively fuelled by continuously high insulin/leptin stimulation and fat storage , as a result of high intake of strongly insulin/leptin stimulating foods and energy .
Human nutrition.0286	Both insulin and leptin normally function as satiety signals to the hypothalamus in the brain ; however , insulin/leptin resistance may reduce this signal and therefore allow continued overfeeding despite large body fat stores .
Human nutrition.0287	In addition , reduced leptin signalling to the brain may reduce leptin 's normal effect to maintain an appropriately high metabolic rate .
Human nutrition.0288	There is a debate about how and to what extent different dietary factors -- such as intake of processed carbohydrates , total protein , fat , and carbohydrate intake , intake of saturated and trans fatty acids , and low intake of vitamins/minerals -- contribute to the development of insulin and leptin resistance .
Human nutrition.0289	In any case , analogous to the way modern man-made pollution may potentially overwhelm the environment 's ability to maintain homeostasis , the recent explosive introduction of high glycemic index and processed foods into the human diet may potentially overwhelm the body 's ability to maintain homeostasis and health -LRB- as evidenced by the metabolic syndrome epidemic -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0290	Hyponatremia Excess water intake , without replenishment of sodium and potassium salts , leads to hyponatremia , which can further lead to water intoxication at more dangerous levels .
Human nutrition.0291	A well-publicized case occurred in 2007 , when Jennifer Strange died while participating in a water-drinking contest .
Human nutrition.0292	More usually , the condition occurs in long-distance endurance events -LRB- such as marathon or triathlon competition and training -RRB- and causes gradual mental dulling , headache , drowsiness , weakness , and confusion ; extreme cases may result in coma , convulsions , and death .
Human nutrition.0293	The primary damage comes from swelling of the brain , caused by increased osmosis as blood salinity decreases .
Human nutrition.0294	Effective fluid replacement techniques include Water aid stations during running/cycling races , trainers providing water during team games such as Soccer and devices such as Camel Baks which can provide water for a person without making it too hard to drink the water .
Human nutrition.0295	Processed foods Since the Industrial Revolution some two hundred years ago , the food processing industry has invented many technologies that both help keep foods fresh longer and alter the fresh state of foods as they appear in nature .
Human nutrition.0296	Cooling is the primary technology used to maintain freshness , whereas many more technologies have been invented to allow foods to last longer without becoming spoiled .
Human nutrition.0297	These latter technologies include pasteurisation , autoclavation , drying , salting , and separation of various components , and all appear to alter the original nutritional contents of food .
Human nutrition.0298	Pasteurisation and autoclavation -LRB- heating techniques -RRB- have no doubt improved the safety of many common foods , preventing epidemics of bacterial infection .
Human nutrition.0299	But some of the -LRB- new -RRB- food processing technologies undoubtedly have downsides as well .
Human nutrition.0300	Modern separation techniques such as milling , centrifugation , and pressing have enabled concentration of particular components of food , yielding flour , oils , juices , and so on , and even separate fatty acids , amino acids , vitamins , and minerals .
Human nutrition.0301	Inevitably , such large-scale concentration changes the nutritional content of food , saving certain nutrients while removing others .
Human nutrition.0302	Heating techniques may also reduce food 's content of many heat-labile nutrients such as certain vitamins and phytochemicals , and possibly other yet to be discovered substances .
Human nutrition.0303	Not only has the direct production of food changed to keep up with the ever evolving American lifestyle , but new types of farming have also emerged .
Human nutrition.0304	Some of these styles consist of organic or genetically modified farming .
Human nutrition.0305	Though the methods differ , they have surprising effects on the nutrient value of the produce .
Human nutrition.0306	According to a study by the Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- , conventionally grown food has just as many flavanoids as organically grown food .
Human nutrition.0307	In this respect , organic food does not have the advantage over non-organic .
Human nutrition.0308	Flavonoids are micronutrients which play a large role in preventing both cancer and heart disease .
Human nutrition.0309	Surprisingly the food with the most flavonoids is grown not by organic farming , but by a method called sustainable farming , where synthetic fertilizers are used but pesticides are used sparingly .
Human nutrition.0310	This proves the possible significance in changing food production on the nutritional value of produce .
Human nutrition.0311	Because of changes in production , and hence the reduced nutritional value , processed foods are often ` enriched ' or ` fortified ' with some of the most critical nutrients -LRB- usually certain vitamins -RRB- that were lost during processing .
Human nutrition.0312	Nonetheless , processed foods tend to have an inferior nutritional profile compared to whole , fresh foods , regarding content of both sugar and high glycemic index starches , potassium/sodium , vitamins , fiber , and of intact , unoxidized -LRB- essential -RRB- fatty acids .
Human nutrition.0313	In addition , processed foods often contain potentially harmful substances such as oxidized fats and trans fatty acids .
Human nutrition.0314	A dramatic example of the effect of food processing on a population 's health is the history of epidemics of beri-beri in people subsisting on polished rice .
Human nutrition.0315	Removing the outer layer of rice by polishing it removes with it the essential vitamin thiamine , causing beri-beri .
Human nutrition.0316	Another example is the development of scurvy among infants in the late 19th century in the United States .
Human nutrition.0317	It turned out that the vast majority of sufferers were being fed milk that had been heat-treated -LRB- as suggested by Pasteur -RRB- to control bacterial disease .
Human nutrition.0318	Pasteurisation was effective against bacteria , but it destroyed the vitamin C .
Human nutrition.0319	As mentioned , lifestyle - and obesity-related diseases are becoming increasingly prevalent all around the world .
Human nutrition.0320	There is little doubt that the increasingly widespread application of some modern food processing technologies has contributed to this development .
Human nutrition.0321	The food processing industry is a major part of the modern economy , and as such it is influential in political decisions -LRB- e.g. nutritional recommendations , agricultural subsidising -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0322	In any known profit-driven economy , health considerations are hardly a priority ; effective production of cheap foods with a long shelf-life is more the trend .
Human nutrition.0323	In general , whole , fresh foods have a relatively short shelf-life and are less profitable to produce and sell than are more processed foods .
Human nutrition.0324	Thus the consumer is left with the choice between more expensive but nutritionally superior whole , fresh foods , and cheap , usually nutritionally inferior processed foods .
Human nutrition.0325	Because processed foods are often cheaper , more convenient -LRB- in purchasing , storage , and preparation -RRB- , and more available , the consumption of nutritionally inferior foods has been increasing throughout the world along with many nutrition-related health complications .
Human nutrition.0326	History Humans have evolved as omnivorous hunter-gatherers over the past 250,000 years .
Human nutrition.0327	The diet of early modern humans varied significantly depending on location and climate .
Human nutrition.0328	The diet in the tropics tended to be based more heavily on plant foods , while the diet at higher latitudes tended more towards animal products .
Human nutrition.0329	Analysis of postcranial and cranial remains of humans and animals from the Neolithic , along with detailed bone modification studies have shown that cannibalism was also prevalent among prehistoric humans .
Human nutrition.0330	Agriculture developed about 10,000 years ago in multiple locations throughout the world , providing grains such as wheat , rice , maize , and potatoes , with staples such as bread , pasta , and tortillas .
Human nutrition.0331	Farming also provided milk and dairy products , and sharply increased the availability of meats and the diversity of vegetables .
Human nutrition.0332	The importance of food purity was recognized when bulk storage led to infestation and contamination risks .
Human nutrition.0333	Cooking developed as an often ritualistic activity , due to efficiency and reliability concerns requiring adherence to strict recipes and procedures , and in response to demands for food purity and consistency .
Human nutrition.0334	From antiquity to 1900 Around 3000 BC the Vedic texts had mentions of scientific research on nutrition .
Human nutrition.0335	The first recorded nutritional experiment is found in the Bible 's Book of Daniel .
Human nutrition.0336	Daniel and his friends were captured by the king of Babylon during an invasion of Israel .
Human nutrition.0337	Selected as court servants , they were to share in the king 's fine foods and wine .
Human nutrition.0338	But they objected , preferring vegetables -LRB- pulses -RRB- and water in accordance with their Jewish dietary restrictions .
Human nutrition.0339	The king 's chief steward reluctantly agreed to a trial .
Human nutrition.0340	Daniel and his friends received their diet for 10 days and were then compared to the king 's men .
Human nutrition.0341	Appearing healthier , they were allowed to continue with their diet .
Human nutrition.0342	Around 475 BC , Anaxagoras stated that food is absorbed by the human body and therefore contained `` homeomerics '' -LRB- generative components -RRB- , suggesting the existence of nutrients .
Human nutrition.0343	Around 400 BC , Hippocrates said , `` Let food be your medicine and medicine be your food . ''
Human nutrition.0344	In the 16th century , scientist and artist Leonardo da Vinci compared metabolism to a burning candle .
Human nutrition.0345	In 1747 , Dr. James Lind , a physician in the British navy , performed the first scientific nutrition experiment , discovering that lime juice saved sailors who had been at sea for years from scurvy , a deadly and painful bleeding disorder .
Human nutrition.0346	The discovery was ignored for forty years , after which British sailors became known as `` limeys . ''
Human nutrition.0347	The essential vitamin C within lime juice would not be identified by scientists until the 1930s .
Human nutrition.0348	Around 1770 , Antoine Lavoisier , the `` Father of Nutrition and Chemistry '' discovered the details of metabolism , demonstrating that the oxidation of food is the source of body heat .
Human nutrition.0349	In 1790 , George Fordyce recognized calcium as necessary for fowl survival .
Human nutrition.0350	In the early 19th century , the elements carbon , nitrogen , hydrogen and oxygen were recognized as the primary components of food , and methods to measure their proportions were developed .
Human nutrition.0351	In 1816 , François Magendie discovered that dogs fed only carbohydrates and fat lost their body protein and died in a few weeks , but dogs also fed protein survived , identifying protein as an essential dietary component .
Human nutrition.0352	In 1840 , Justus Liebig discovered the chemical makeup of carbohydrates -LRB- sugars -RRB- , fats -LRB- fatty acids -RRB- and proteins -LRB- amino acids -RRB- .
Human nutrition.0353	In the 1860s , Claude Bernard discovered that body fat can be synthesized from carbohydrate and protein , showing that the energy in blood glucose can be stored as fat or as glycogen .
Human nutrition.0354	In the early 1880s , Kanehiro Takaki observed that Japanese sailors -LRB- whose diets consisted almost entirely of white rice -RRB- developed beriberi -LRB- or endemic neuritis , a disease causing heart problems and paralysis -RRB- but British sailors and Japanese naval officers did not .
Human nutrition.0355	Adding various types of vegetables and meats to the diets of Japanese sailors prevented the disease .
Human nutrition.0356	In 1896 , Baumann observed iodine in thyroid glands .
Human nutrition.0357	In 1897 , Christiaan Eijkman worked with natives of Java , who also suffered from beriberi .
Human nutrition.0358	Eijkman observed that chickens fed the native diet of white rice developed the symptoms of beriberi , but remained healthy when fed unprocessed brown rice with the outer bran intact .
Human nutrition.0359	Eijkman cured the natives by feeding them brown rice , discovering that food can cure disease .
Human nutrition.0360	Over two decades later , nutritionists learned that the outer rice bran contains vitamin B1 , also known as thiamine .
Human nutrition.0361	From 1900 to the present In the early 20th century , Carl von Voit and Max Rubner independently measured caloric energy expenditure in different species of animals , applying principles of physics in nutrition .
Human nutrition.0362	In 1906 , Wilcock and Hopkins showed that the amino acid tryptophan was necessary for the survival of rats .
Human nutrition.0363	He fed them a special mixture of food containing all the nutrients he believed were essential for survival , but the rats died .
Human nutrition.0364	A second group of rats to which he also fed an amount of milk containing vitamins .
Human nutrition.0365	Gowland Hopkins recognized `` accessory food factors '' other than calories , protein and minerals , as organic materials essential to health but which the body can not synthesize .
Human nutrition.0366	In 1907 , Stephen M. Babcock and Edwin B. Hart conducted the single-grain experiment .
Human nutrition.0367	This experiment ran through 1911 .
Human nutrition.0368	In 1912 , Casimir Funk coined the term vitamin , a vital factor in the diet , from the words `` vital '' and `` amine , '' because these unknown substances preventing scurvy , beriberi , and pellagra , were thought then to be derived from ammonia .
Human nutrition.0369	The vitamins were studied in the first half of the 20th century .
Human nutrition.0370	In 1913 , Elmer McCollum discovered the first vitamins , fat soluble vitamin A , and water soluble vitamin B -LRB- in 1915 ; now known to be a complex of several water-soluble vitamins -RRB- and named vitamin C as the then-unknown substance preventing scurvy .
Human nutrition.0371	Lafayette Mendel and Thomas Osborne also performed pioneering work on vitamins A and B .
Human nutrition.0372	In 1919 , Sir Edward Mellanby incorrectly identified rickets as a vitamin A deficiency , because he could cure it in dogs with cod liver oil .
Human nutrition.0373	In 1922 , McCollum destroyed the vitamin A in cod liver oil but found it still cured rickets , and named it vitamin D. Also in 1922 , H.M. Evans and L.S. Bishop discovered vitamin E as essential for rat pregnancy , and originally called it `` food factor X '' until 1925 .
Human nutrition.0374	In 1925 , Hart discovered that trace amounts of copper are necessary for iron absorption .
Human nutrition.0375	In 1927 , Adolf Otto Reinhold Windaus synthesized vitamin D , for which he won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1928 .
Human nutrition.0376	In 1928 , Albert Szent-Györgyi isolated ascorbic acid , and in 1932 proved that it is vitamin C by preventing scurvy .
Human nutrition.0377	In 1935 he synthesized it , and in 1937 won a Nobel Prize for his efforts .
Human nutrition.0378	Szent-Györgyi concurrently elucidated much of the citric acid cycle .
Human nutrition.0379	In the 1930s , William Cumming Rose identified essential amino acids , necessary protein components which the body can not synthesize .
Human nutrition.0380	In 1935 , Underwood and Marston independently discovered the necessity of cobalt .
Human nutrition.0381	In 1936 , Eugene Floyd Dubois showed that work and school performance are related to caloric intake .
Human nutrition.0382	In 1938 , Erhard Fernholz discovered the chemical structure of vitamin E .
Human nutrition.0383	It was synthesised by Paul Karrer .
Human nutrition.0384	In 1940 , rationing in the United Kingdom during and after World War II took place according to nutritional principles drawn up by Elsie Widdowson and others .
Human nutrition.0385	In 1941 , the first Recommended Dietary Allowances -LRB- RDAs -RRB- were established by the National Research Council .
Human nutrition.0386	In 1992 , The U.S. Department of Agriculture introduced the Food Guide Pyramid .
Human nutrition.0387	In 2002 , a Natural Justice study showed a relation between nutrition and violent behavior .
Human nutrition.0388	In 2005 , a study found that obesity may be caused by adenovirus in addition to bad nutrition .
Khufu ship.0000	bytes = `` 22740 '' > The Khufu ship is an intact full-size vessel from Ancient Egypt that was sealed into a pit in the Giza pyramid complex at the foot of the Great Pyramid of Giza around 2500 BC .
Khufu ship.0001	The ship now is preserved in the Giza Solar boat museum .
Khufu ship.0002	The ship was almost certainly built for Khufu -LRB- King Cheops -RRB- , the second pharaoh of the Fourth Dynasty of the Old Kingdom of Egypt .
Khufu ship.0003	Like other buried Ancient Egyptian ships , it was apparently part of the extensive grave goods intended for use in the afterlife , and contained no bodies , unlike northern European ship burials .
Khufu ship.0004	History The Khufu ship is one of the oldest , largest , and best-preserved vessels from antiquity .
Khufu ship.0005	It measures 43.6 m -LRB- 143 ft -RRB- long and 5.9 m -LRB- 19.5 ft -RRB- wide .
Khufu ship.0006	It was thus identified as the world 's oldest intact ship and has been described as `` a masterpiece of woodcraft '' that could sail today if put into water .
Khufu ship.0007	However , the vessel may not have been designed for sailing -LRB- no rigging -RRB- or paddling -LRB- no room -RRB- .
Khufu ship.0008	The ship was one of two rediscovered in 1954 by Kamal el-Mallakh -- undisturbed since it was sealed into a pit carved out of the Giza bedrock .
Khufu ship.0009	It was built largely of Lebanon cedar planking in the `` shell-first '' construction technique , using unpegged tenons of Christ 's thorn .
Khufu ship.0010	The ship was built with a flat bottom composed of several planks , but no actual keel , with the planks and frames lashed together with Halfah grass , and has been reconstructed from 1,224 pieces which had been laid in a logical , disassembled order in the pit beside the pyramid .
Khufu ship.0011	Reconstruction It took years for the boat to be painstakingly reassembled , primarily by the Egyptian Department of Antiquities ' chief restorer , Ahmed Youssef Moustafa -LRB- later known as Haj Ahmed Youssef -RRB- .
Khufu ship.0012	Before reconstructing the boat , he had to gain enough experience on Ancient Egyptian boat-building .
Khufu ship.0013	He studied the reliefs carved on walls and tombs , and many of little wooden models of ships and boats found in tombs .
Khufu ship.0014	Hag Ahmed visited the Nile boatyards of Old Cairo and Ma'adi and went to Alexandria , where wooden river boats were still being made .
Khufu ship.0015	He hoped that modern Egyptian shipwrights might have retained ship building methods that would suggest how Ancient Egyptians built their ships .
Khufu ship.0016	Then he investigated the work of shipwrights who built in a different tradition .
Khufu ship.0017	Function The history and function of the ship are not precisely known .
Khufu ship.0018	It is of the type known as a `` solar barge '' , a ritual vessel to carry the resurrected king with the sun god Ra across the heavens .
Khufu ship.0019	However , it bears some signs of having been used in water , and it is possible that the ship was either a funerary `` barge '' used to carry the king 's embalmed body from Memphis to Giza , or even that Khufu himself used it as a `` pilgrimage ship '' to visit holy places and that it was then buried for him to use in the afterlife .
Khufu ship.0020	The Khufu ship has been on display to the public in a specially built museum at the Giza pyramid complex since 1982 .
Khufu ship.0021	Its discovery was described as one of the greatest Ancient Egyptian discoveries in Zahi Hawass 's documentary Egypt 's Ten Greatest Discoveries .
Khufu ship.0022	The ship is housed in the The Khufu Boat Museum , a small modern facility resting alongside the Great Pyramid .
Khufu ship.0023	The first floor of the museum takes the visitor through visuals , photographs and writings on the process of excavating and restoring the felucca .
Khufu ship.0024	The ditch where the main felucca was found is incorporated into the museum ground floor design .
Khufu ship.0025	To see the restored felucca , the visitor must climb a staircase leading to the second floor .
Khufu ship.0026	Floor to ceiling windows allow for much sunlight and the wooden walkway takes the visitor around the felucca where the visitor can get a close view of its impressive size - 143 feet long -LRB- 44m -RRB- and 19.5 feet wide -LRB- 6m -RRB- .
Khufu ship.0027	Other solar ships in Egypt Several boat pits were found in Ancient Egyptian sites .
Khufu ship.0028	Abu Gorab A few hundred meters to the north of Abusir , about six miles southwest of Cairo is the sun temple known as Abu Gorab .
Khufu ship.0029	There lies the ruins of Niuserre 's temple , Outside the temple proper and near its southern side , the German expedition also discovered a large building in the shape of a boat .
Khufu ship.0030	This was a pit , lined with mud bricks which was at one time plastered , whitewashed and colored .
Khufu ship.0031	This structure was augmented with several other elements made from different materials such as wood .
Khufu ship.0032	This structure is believed to have been purely symbolic , representing a `` solar boat '' in which the sun god was supposed to have floated across the heavenly ocean .
Khufu ship.0033	-LRB- The pit might have contained a boat -RRB- Abu Rawash Two boats were discovered at Abu Rawash hill M. -LRB- 2 boats or Ships -RRB- At the complex of Djedefre , Emile Chassinat , between 1900 and 1902 , discovered the remains of a funerary settlement and a boat pit The solar boat pit is situated on the east side of the pyramid .
Khufu ship.0034	It is a ditch 35 meters long cut out of the living limestone .
Khufu ship.0035	It is destined for the royal boat .
Khufu ship.0036	The beautiful heads carved into the likeness of Djedefre were found there .
Khufu ship.0037	Abusir Neferirkare 's pyramid at Abusir was the largest structure in the region .
Khufu ship.0038	Large wooden boats were buried outside the pyramid in its courtyard on the north and south sides .
Khufu ship.0039	Archaeologists discovered them by their mention in a cache of papyrus found within the mortuary temple , but unfortunately , when the they excavated the southern boat pit , only dust remained of the boat itself .
Khufu ship.0040	Abydos In 1991 in the desert near the temple of Khentyamentiu near Abydos , archaeologists uncovered the remains of the 14 ships dating back to the early first dynasty -LRB- 2950-2775 BC -RRB- , possibly associated with Hor-Aha .
Khufu ship.0041	These 75 ft ships are buried side by side and have wooden hulls , rough stone boulders which were used as anchors , and `` sewn '' wooden planks .
Khufu ship.0042	Also found within their desert graves were remains of the woven straps that joined the planks , as well as reed bundles that were used to seal seams between planks .
Khufu ship.0043	The Abydos ships have the honor of being the world 's oldest planked boats .
Khufu ship.0044	Abydos had at least a dozen boat graves adjacent to a massive funerary enclosure for the late Dynasty II -LRB- ca. 2675 B.C. -RRB- Pharaoh Khasekhemwy .
Khufu ship.0045	Their age should be more than 400 years older than Khufu 's -LRB- Cheops -RRB- Ships were 25 meters long , 2.5 meters wide and about 0.5 meters deep , seating about 30 rowers .
Khufu ship.0046	They had narrowing sterns and prows and they were painted .
Khufu ship.0047	They are in meaning and function the direct ancestors of the boat recovered at Khufu 's Great Pyramid at Giza The ships are possibly associated with King Aha , the first ruler of that dynasty .
Khufu ship.0048	The length of the structures varied from nearly 20 to 27m .
Khufu ship.0049	These are the world 's most ancient planked hulls .
Khufu ship.0050	The traditions of the hull construction seen in all the excavated vessels continued through the end of the sixth century BC and , with the substitution of nails for mortise-and-tenon joints , into the present .
Khufu ship.0051	An abandoned freighter , stripped of its internal timbers and left on a small branch of the Nile near Mataria -LRB- ancient Heliopolis , north of modern Cairo -RRB- provides the first instance of pegged mortise-and-tenon joints in an Egyptian hull .
Khufu ship.0052	Not all joints were through-fastened , and the pegs , or treenails , may also have fastened frames to the hull , but for this marks a dramatic departure from previous shipbuilding techniques .
Khufu ship.0053	Dahshur Six boats of Middle Kingdom date were found at Dahshur .
Khufu ship.0054	They 're about 10 m long each .
Khufu ship.0055	In 1893 Jaques de Morgan discovered six boats near the Middle Kingdom pyramid of Senwosret III at Dashur .
Khufu ship.0056	He made drawings and measurements of only one boat -LRB- the White boat -RRB- from the cache at Dahshur .
Khufu ship.0057	Excavations conducted in A.D. 1894 and 1895 by French archaeologist Jean-Jacques de Morgan at the funerary complex of Senwosret III on the plain of Dahshur revealed five or six small boats .
Khufu ship.0058	Today , only four of the `` Dahshur boats '' can be located with certainty ; two are in the United States , one in the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh and one in the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago .
Khufu ship.0059	The remaining two are on display in The Egyptian Museum , Cairo .
Khufu ship.0060	Since their excavation these boats remained relatively inconspicuous until the mid-1980s when a study of the two hulls in the United States was conducted .
Khufu ship.0061	Giza Necropolis Khufu Seven boat pits have been identified around the Great Pyramid .
Khufu ship.0062	Five of which belong to the Great Pyramid proper .
Khufu ship.0063	The other 2 are associated with the pyramid of Hetepheres -LRB- GIa -RRB- and the pyramid of the Ka -LRB- GId -RRB- .
Khufu ship.0064	Khufu 's boat pits are located on the eastern side of the pyramid -LRB- 3 -RRB- and the southern side -LRB- 2 -RRB- .
Khufu ship.0065	In one of the southern boat pits a disassembled wooden barge was discovered in 1954 .
Khufu ship.0066	It has been reconstructed and resides in the boat shaped museum .
Khufu ship.0067	In 1987 , the western boat pit at the Great Pyramid was examined by a microprobe inserted through a hole drilled into the pit , confirming the presence of a second wooden boat similar to the first .
Khufu ship.0068	It was originally decided that the second boat should remain in its pit , in conditions which made its preservation near perfect .
Khufu ship.0069	The second solar boat of Khufu is being excavated in 2012-2013 and is going to be reconstructed .
Khufu ship.0070	Sakuji Yoshimura , a Waseda University professor who is leading the restoration project with Egypt 's Antiquities Council , said -LRB- June 2011 -RRB- that scientists discovered that this second ship is inscribed with Khufu 's name .
Khufu ship.0071	Khafre Khafre 's pyramid has five pits that once contained funeral boats .
Khufu ship.0072	One known boat pit is alongside the east face of Khafre 's pyramid Another two of the covered boat pits of Khafre lie on the east side of the pyramid & covered boat pit lies on the south side of the mortuary temple of Khafre .
Khufu ship.0073	Others Unas has two boats .
Khufu ship.0074	Archaic boats had been found at Helwan by Z. Saad .
Khufu ship.0075	-LRB- 4 Ships -RRB- In total 4 or 5 boat burials were found at Helwan , 2 at Abu Roash Hill M , and finally others at the northerly Abydos site of the Royal enclosures , near those just found .
Khufu ship.0076	Remains of Old Kingdom boats were found at Tarkhan -LRB- at least one boat -RRB- A ` model estate ' and funerary boat was found at Saqqara by W. Emery -LRB- in 1957-8 ; tomb S 3357 -RRB- .
Khufu ship.0077	-LRB- 3 Ships -RRB- At least 3 mud-brick boat graves were associated with First Dynasty rulers and high-ranking officials .
Khufu ship.0078	Forty timbers were found in excavations near the Pyramid of Senusert I in Lisht .
Khufu ship.0079	They were identified as part of vessel or vessels .
Khufu ship.0080	A mudbrick boat pit has also been found outside Amenemhet 's pyramid perimeter wall .
Khufu ship.0081	Excavation of the remains of seagoing ships at Wadi/Mersa Gawasis , south of Safaga on the Egyptian Red Sea coast , in 2004 -- 05 and 2005 -- 06 provides extensive physical evidence for construction techniques , wood selection , and recycling and re-use practices of the ancient Egyptians .
Khufu ship.0082	Discoveries at Gawasis prove that common Egyptian river-oriented design and construction techniques were successful both on the Nile and at sea .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0000	bytes = `` 26172 '' > Several Ancient Egyptian solar ships & boat pits were found in Ancient Egyptian sites .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0001	The most famous is the Khufu ship now preserved in the Giza Solar boat museum beside Khufu pyramid at Giza .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0002	The full-sized ships or boats were buried near Ancient Egyptians ' Pyramids or Temples at many sites .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0003	The history and function of the ships are not precisely known .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0004	They might be of the type known as a `` solar barge '' , a ritual vessel to carry the resurrected king with the sun god Ra across the heavens .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0005	However , some ships bear signs of being used in water , and it is possible that these ships were a funerary `` barge '' .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0006	Comparative table of solar ships Giza Necropolis Khufu Seven boat pits have been identified around the Great Pyramid .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0007	Five of which belong to the Great Pyramid proper .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0008	The other 2 are associated with the pyramid of Hetepheres -LRB- GIa -RRB- and the pyramid of the Ka -LRB- GId -RRB- .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0009	Khufu 's boat pits are located on the eastern side of the pyramid and the southern side .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0010	Khufu First Solar ship The Khufu ship is an intact full-size vessel from Ancient Egypt that was sealed into a pit in the Giza pyramid complex at the foot of the Great Pyramid of Giza around 2500 BC .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0011	It was thus identified as the world 's oldest intact ship and has been described as `` a masterpiece of woodcraft '' that could sail today if put into water .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0012	The Khufu ship is one of the oldest , largest , and best-preserved vessels from antiquity .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0013	It measures 43.6 m -LRB- 143 ft -RRB- long and 5.9 m -LRB- 19.5 ft -RRB- wide .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0014	The ship was one of two rediscovered in 1954 by Kamal el-Mallakh -- undisturbed since it was sealed into a pit carved out of the Giza bedrock .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0015	It took years for the boat to be painstakingly reassembled , primarily by the Egyptian Department of Antiquities ' chief restorer , Ahmed Youssef Moustafa -LRB- later known as Haj Ahmed Youssef -RRB- .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0016	The ship is today housed in the The Khufu Boat Museum , a small modern facility built in 1982 resting alongside the Great Pyramid .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0017	In one of the southern boat pits a disassembled wooden barge was discovered in 1954 .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0018	It has been reconstructed and resides in the boat shaped museum .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0019	In 1987 , the western boat pit at the Great Pyramid was examined by a microprobe inserted through a hole drilled into the pit , confirming the presence of a second wooden boat similar to the first .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0020	It was originally decided that the second boat should remain in its pit , in conditions which made its preservation near perfect .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0021	Khufu Second Solar Ship The second solar boat of Khufu is being excavated in 2012-2013 and is going to be reconstructed .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0022	Sakuji Yoshimura , a Waseda University professor who is leading the restoration project with Egypt 's Antiquities Council , said -LRB- June 2011 -RRB- that scientists discovered that this second ship is inscribed with Khufu 's name .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0023	Hetepheres Solar Ship Associated with the pyramid of Hetepheres -LRB- GIa -RRB- .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0024	The Ka Solar Ship Associated with the pyramid of the Ka -LRB- GId -RRB- .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0025	Khafre Solar Ship Khafre 's pyramid has five pits that once contained funeral boats .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0026	One known boat pit is alongside the east face of Khafre 's pyramid Another two of the covered boat pits of Khafre lie on the east side of the pyramid & covered boat pit lies on the south side of the mortuary temple of Khafre .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0027	Abu Gorab Niuserre Solar ship A few hundred meters to the north of Abusir , about six miles southwest of Cairo is the sun temple known as Abu Gorab .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0028	There lies the ruins of Niuserre 's temple , Outside the temple proper and near its southern side , the German expedition also discovered a large building in the shape of a boat .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0029	This was a pit , lined with mud bricks which was at one time plastered , whitewashed and colored .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0030	This structure was augmented with several other elements made from different materials such as wood .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0031	This structure is believed to have been purely symbolic , representing a `` solar boat '' in which the sun god was supposed to have floated across the heavenly ocean .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0032	-LRB- The pit might have contained a boat -RRB- Abu Rawash King Den Solar ship A wooden funerary boat thought to have once belonged to First Dynasty King Den has been discovered at Abu Roash , the place of the pyramid of Khufu 's son , Djedefre .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0033	Unearthed in the northern area of Mastaba number six -LRB- a flat-roofed burial structure -RRB- at the archaeological site , boat consists of 11 large wooden planks reaching six metres high and 150 metres wide .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0034	Two boats were discovered at Abu Rawash hill M. -LRB- 2 boats or Ships -RRB- Djedefre Solar Ship At the complex of Djedefre , Emile Chassinat , between 1900 and 1902 , discovered the remains of a funerary settlement and a boat pit The solar boat pit is situated on the east side of the pyramid .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0035	It is a ditch 35 meters long cut out of the living limestone .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0036	It is destined for the royal boat .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0037	The beautiful heads carved into the likeness of Djedefre were found there .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0038	Abusir Neferirkare Solar Ship Neferirkare 's pyramid at Abusir was the largest structure in the region .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0039	Large wooden boats were buried outside the pyramid in its courtyard on the north and south sides .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0040	Archaeologists discovered them by their mention in a cache of papyrus found within the mortuary temple , but unfortunately , when the they excavated the southern boat pit , only dust remained of the boat itself .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0041	Abydos The Abydos ships have the honor of being the world 's oldest planked boats .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0042	Hor-Aha Slar ships In 1991 in the desert near the temple of Khentyamentiu near Abydos , archaeologists uncovered the remains of the 14 ships dating back to the early first dynasty -LRB- 2950-2775 BC -RRB- , possibly associated with Hor-Aha .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0043	These 75 ft ships are buried side by side and have wooden hulls , rough stone boulders which were used as anchors , and `` sewn '' wooden planks .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0044	Also found within their desert graves were remains of the woven straps that joined the planks , as well as reed bundles that were used to seal seams between planks .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0045	Abydos had at least a dozen boat graves adjacent to a massive funerary enclosure for the late Dynasty II -LRB- ca. 2675 B.C. -RRB- Pharaoh Khasekhemwy .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0046	Their age should be more than 400 years older than Khufu 's -LRB- Cheops -RRB- Ships were 25 meters long , 2.5 meters wide and about 0.5 meters deep , seating about 30 rowers .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0047	They had narrowing sterns and prows and they were painted .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0048	They are in meaning and function the direct ancestors of the boat recovered at Khufu 's Great Pyramid at Giza The ships are possibly associated with King Aha , the first ruler of that dynasty .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0049	The length of the structures varied from nearly 20 to 27m .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0050	These are the world 's most ancient planked hulls .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0051	The traditions of the hull construction seen in all the excavated vessels continued through the end of the sixth century BC and , with the substitution of nails for mortise-and-tenon joints , into the present .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0052	An abandoned freighter , stripped of its internal timbers and left on a small branch of the Nile near Mataria -LRB- ancient Heliopolis , north of modern Cairo -RRB- provides the first instance of pegged mortise-and-tenon joints in an Egyptian hull .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0053	Not all joints were through-fastened , and the pegs , or treenails , may also have fastened frames to the hull , but for this marks a dramatic departure from previous shipbuilding techniques .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0054	Dahshur Senusret III Solar ships Six boats of Middle Kingdom date were found at Dahshur .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0055	They are about 10 m long each .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0056	In 1893 Jaques de Morgan discovered six boats near the Middle Kingdom pyramid of Senwosret III at Dashur .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0057	He made drawings and measurements of only one boat -LRB- the White boat -RRB- from the cache at Dahshur .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0058	One of the ships measure 18 meters .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0059	Excavations conducted in A.D. 1894 and 1895 by French archaeologist Jean-Jacques de Morgan at the funerary complex of Senwosret III on the plain of Dahshur revealed five or six small boats .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0060	Today , only four of the `` Dahshur boats '' can be located with certainty ; two are in the United States , one in the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh and one in the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0061	The remaining two are on display in The Egyptian Museum , Cairo .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0062	Since their excavation these boats remained relatively inconspicuous until the mid-1980s when a study of the two hulls in the United States was conducted .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0063	Amenemhat III Solar ship The Ship pit was discovered at the south perimeter of his pyramid , it measured 15 meter by 5.57 meters .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0064	Saqqarah Mastabas A ` model estate ' and funerary boat was found at Saqqara by W. Emery -LRB- in 1957-8 ; tomb S 3357 -RRB- .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0065	-LRB- 3 Ships -RRB- At least 3 mud-brick boat graves were associated with First Dynasty rulers and high-ranking officials .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0066	Unas Solar Ship Unas pyramid at Saqqarah has two boats .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0067	One the boat pits is 44 meter long and is located 150 meter away from the remains of the funeral temple .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0068	Lined with limestone blocks these boat pits are thought to have been simulacra of solar boats .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0069	Tarkhan Remains of Old Kingdom boats were found at Tarkhan -LRB- at least one boat -RRB- Helwan Archaic boats had been found at Helwan by Z. Saad .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0070	-LRB- 4 Ships -RRB- In total 4 or 5 boat burials were found at Helwan , 2 at Abu Roash Hill M , and finally others at the northerly Abydos site of the Royal enclosures , near those just found .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0071	Lisht Senusert Solar Ship Forty timbers were found in excavations near the Pyramid of Senusret I in Lisht .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0072	They were identified as part of vessel or vessels .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0073	Amenemhat I Solar ship A mudbrick boat pit has also been found outside Amenemhat I 's pyramid western perimeter wall .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0074	Other Ancient Egyptian Ships Excavation of the remains of seagoing ships at Wadi/Mersa Gawasis , south of Safaga on the Egyptian Red Sea coast , in 2004 -- 05 and 2005 -- 06 provides extensive physical evidence for construction techniques , wood selection , and recycling and re-use practices of the ancient Egyptians .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0075	Discoveries at Gawasis prove that common Egyptian river-oriented design and construction techniques were successful both on the Nile and at sea .
Ancient Egyptian solar ships.0076	Japanese Nonprofit Organization Institute of the Solar Boat Japanese Archeologists have established a nonprofit Organization Institute of the Solar Boat in Tokyo , Japan .
MicroC/OS-II.0000	bytes = `` 9779 '' > MicroC/OS-II -LRB- commonly termed µC / OS-II or uC/OS-II -RRB- , is the acronym for Micro-Controller Operating Systems Version 2 .
MicroC/OS-II.0001	It is a priority-based pre-emptive real-time multitasking operating system kernel for microprocessors , written mainly in the C programming language .
MicroC/OS-II.0002	It is intended for use in embedded systems .
MicroC/OS-II.0003	Its features are : * It is a very small real-time kernel .
MicroC/OS-II.0004	* Memory footprint is about 20KB for a fully functional kernel .
MicroC/OS-II.0005	* Source code is written mostly in ANSI C. * Highly portable , ROMable , very scalable , preemptive real-time , deterministic , multitasking kernel .
MicroC/OS-II.0006	* It can manage up to 64 tasks -LRB- 56 user tasks available -RRB- .
MicroC/OS-II.0007	* It has connectivity with μC / GUI and μC / FS -LRB- GUI and File Systems for μC / OS II -RRB- .
MicroC/OS-II.0008	* It is ported to more than 100 microprocessors and microcontrollers .
MicroC/OS-II.0009	* It is simple to use and simple to implement but very effective compared to the price/performance ratio .
MicroC/OS-II.0010	* It supports all type of processors from 8-bit to 64-bit .
MicroC/OS-II.0011	MicroC/OS-II is the second generation of a kernel originally published -LRB- with source code -RRB- in a two-part 1992 article in Embedded Systems Programming magazine and the book µC / OS The Real-Time Kernel by Jean J. Labrosse -LRB- ISBN 0-87930-444-8 -RRB- .
MicroC/OS-II.0012	The author intended at first to simply describe the internals of a portable operating system he had developed for his own use , but later developed the OS as a commercial product .
MicroC/OS-II.0013	µC / OS-II is currently maintained by Micrium Inc. and can be licensed per product or per product line .
MicroC/OS-II.0014	Use of the operating system is free for educational non-commercial use .
MicroC/OS-II.0015	Additionally , Micrium provides other middleware software products such as µC / CAN , µC / FL , µC / FS , µC / GUI , µC / Modbus , µC / TCP-IP , µC / USB and a large assortment of µC / TCP-IP applications such as client software for DHCP , POP3 , SNTP , FTP , TFTP , DNS , SMTP , and TTCP .
MicroC/OS-II.0016	Server software includes HTTP , FTP , and TFTP .
MicroC/OS-II.0017	PPP is also available .
MicroC/OS-II.0018	On March 24 , 2009 , Micrium released an enhanced product , µC / OS-III , with licensed source code available for 9,995 per end-product .
MicroC/OS-II.0019	µC / OS-III features unlimited number of tasks and priorities , and round robin scheduling .
MicroC/OS-II.0020	Task states µC / OS-II is a multitasking operating system .
MicroC/OS-II.0021	Each task is an infinite loop and can be in any one of the following five states : * Dormant * Ready * Running * Waiting * Interrupt service routine Task Management -LRB- Services -RRB- * Task Feature * Task Creation * Task Stack & Stack Checking * Task Deletion * Change a Task 's Priority * Suspend and Resume a Task * Get Information about a Task Task Feature μC / OS-II can manage up to 64 tasks .
MicroC/OS-II.0022	The four highest priority tasks and the four lowest priority tasks are reserved for its own use .
MicroC/OS-II.0023	This leaves 56 tasks for applications .
MicroC/OS-II.0024	The lower the value of the priority , the higher the priority of the task .
MicroC/OS-II.0025	-LRB- Something on the lines of Rate Monotonic Scheduling -RRB- .
MicroC/OS-II.0026	The task priority number also serves as the task identifier .
MicroC/OS-II.0027	Task Creation and Management There are two functions for creating a task : OSTaskCreate -LRB- -RRB- & OSTaskCreateExt -LRB- -RRB- .
MicroC/OS-II.0028	After the task is created , the task has to get a stack in which it will store its data .
MicroC/OS-II.0029	The stack must consist of contiguous memory locations .
MicroC/OS-II.0030	It is necessary to determine how much stack space a task actually uses .
MicroC/OS-II.0031	Deleting a task means the task will be returned to its dormant state and does not mean that the code for the task will be deleted .
MicroC/OS-II.0032	The calling task can delete itself .
MicroC/OS-II.0033	If another task tries to delete the current task , the resources are not freed and thus are lost .
MicroC/OS-II.0034	So the task has to delete itself after it uses its resources .
MicroC/OS-II.0035	Priority of the calling task or another task can be changed at run time .
MicroC/OS-II.0036	A task can suspend itself or another task , a suspended task can resume itself .
MicroC/OS-II.0037	A task can obtain information about itself or other tasks .
MicroC/OS-II.0038	This information can be used to know what the task is doing at a particular time .
MicroC/OS-II.0039	Memory Management Each memory partition consists of several fixed-sized memory blocks .
MicroC/OS-II.0040	A task obtains memory blocks from the memory partition .
MicroC/OS-II.0041	A task must create a memory partition before it can be used .
MicroC/OS-II.0042	Allocation and de-allocation of these fixed-sized memory blocks is done in constant time and is deterministic .
MicroC/OS-II.0043	Multiple memory partitions can exist , so a task can obtain memory blocks of different sizes .
MicroC/OS-II.0044	A specific memory block should be returned to its memory partition from which it came .
MicroC/OS-II.0045	The services of Memory management includes : * Initializing the Memory Manager .
MicroC/OS-II.0046	* Creating a Memory Partition .
MicroC/OS-II.0047	* Obtaining Status of a Memory Partition .
MicroC/OS-II.0048	* Obtaining a Memory Block .
MicroC/OS-II.0049	* Returning a Memory Block .
MicroC/OS-II.0050	* Waiting for Memory Blocks from a Memory Partition .
MicroC/OS-II.0051	Time Management A clock tick is a periodic time source to keep track of time delays and time outs .
MicroC/OS-II.0052	Here , tick intervals varies from 10 ~ 100 ms. The faster the tick rate , the higher the overhead imposed on the system .
MicroC/OS-II.0053	Whenever a clock tick occurs μC / OS-II increments a 32 - bit counter , the counter starts at zero , and rolls over to 4,294,967,295 -LRB- 2 ^ 32-1 -RRB- ticks .
MicroC/OS-II.0054	A task can be delayed and a delayed task can also be resumed .
MicroC/OS-II.0055	It involves five services that includes : OSTimeDLY -LRB- -RRB- , OSTimeDLYHMSM -LRB- -RRB- , OSTimeDlyResume -LRB- -RRB- , OSTimeGet -LRB- -RRB- , OSTimeSet -LRB- -RRB- .
MicroC/OS-II.0056	Inter-Task Communication Inter-task or inter process communication in μC / OS takes place using : Semaphores , Message mailbox , Message queues , Tasks and Interrupt service routines -LRB- ISR -RRB- .
MicroC/OS-II.0057	They can interact with each other through an ECB -LRB- event control block -RRB- .
MicroC/OS-II.0058	Writing Applications Under μC / OS Tasks running under a multitasking kernel should be written in one of two ways : 1 .
MicroC/OS-II.0059	A non-returning forever loop .
MicroC/OS-II.0060	For example : void Task -LRB- void * -RRB- -LCB- DoInitStuff -LRB- -RRB- ; while -LRB- 1 -RRB- -LCB- do this ; do that ; do the other thing ; call OS service -LRB- -RRB- ; / / e.g. OSTimeDelay , OSSemPend , etc. . -RCB- -RCB-
MicroC/OS-II.0061	2 .
MicroC/OS-II.0062	A task that deletes itself after running .
MicroC/OS-II.0063	For example : void Task -LRB- void * -RRB- -LCB- do this ; do that ; do the other thing ; call OS service -LRB- -RRB- ; / / e.g. OSTimeDelay , OSSemPend , etc. .
MicroC/OS-II.0064	OSTaskDelete -LRB- -RRB- ; / / Ask the OS to delete the task -RCB- Ports µC / OS-II has ports for most popular processors and boards in the market and is suitable for use in safety critical embedded systems such as aviation , medical systems and nuclear installations .
MicroC/OS-II.0065	There are significantly more ports than listed here , and ports are subject to continuous development .
MicroC/OS-II.0066	If a particular processor is n't listed here , inquiries can be made at Micrium 's website .
MicroC/OS-II.0067	Altera : * Nios II Analog Devices : * Blackfin ARM : * ARM7TDMI * ARM720T * ARM920T * ARM926EJ-S * Cortex-M3 Atmel : * AVR * AVR32 * AT91SAMxxxxx -LRB- ARM7/9 -RRB- Freescale/Motorola : * 6800/01/02 / 03 * 6809 * 68HC08 * 68HC11 * 68HC12 * 68HC16 * 680xx * 683xx * MC9S12 * M683xx * MCF5272 * MCF5275 * i.MX21 * MC9S08 * MPC551x Fujitsu : * Softune IBM/AMCC : * PowerPC 403 , 405 , 440 Ingenic : * jz4720/25/30 / 32/40/50 / 55 Intel : * 8080/85 * 80x86/88 Lattice Semiconductor : * Mico32 Microchip Technology : * PIC24 * dsPIC33 * PIC32 Mitsubishi : * M16C/80 NEC : * 78K4 * V850E NXP Semiconductors : * LPC1300 , LPC1700 , LPC1800 -LRB- Cortex-M3 -RRB- * LPC2xxx -LRB- ARM 7 -RRB- * LPC3180 -LRB- ARM 9 -RRB- OpenRISC : * OR32 Rabbit Inc : * Rabbit4000 * Rabbit5000 Renesas/Hitachi : * H8/3xx * H8/5xx * 64180 * R8C * M32C STMicroelectronics : * STM32 Texas Instruments : * MSP430 Xilinx : * MicroBlaze
MicroC/OS-III.0000	bytes = `` 9371 '' > MicroC/OS-III -LRB- commonly termed µC / OS-III or uC/OS-III -RRB- , is the acronym for Micro-Controller Operating Systems Version 3 .
MicroC/OS-III.0001	It is a low-cost priority-based pre-emptive real-time multitasking operating system kernel for microprocessors , written mainly in the C programming language .
MicroC/OS-III.0002	It was introduced in the year 2009 that is intended for use in embedded systems .
MicroC/OS-III.0003	It is a scalable , ROMable , pre-emptive kernel that manages a number of tasks .
MicroC/OS-III.0004	It allows for unlimited tasks , semaphores , mutexes , event flags , message queues , timers and memory partitions .
MicroC/OS-III.0005	The user allocates all kernel objects at run time .
MicroC/OS-III.0006	Add-on Features # μC / OS-III allows integration with other software packages such as μC / TCP-IP , μC / GUI , μC / File System , μC / USB , μC / CAN , μC / Modbus , μC / Bluetooth , for obtaining greater scalability and performance .
MicroC/OS-III.0007	# It provides features to allow stack growth of tasks to be monitored .
MicroC/OS-III.0008	While task size is not limited , they need to have a minimum size based on the CPU used .
MicroC/OS-III.0009	# It allows multiple tasks to run at the same priority level .
MicroC/OS-III.0010	When equal priority tasks are ready to run , μC / OS-III runs each for a user - specified time .
MicroC/OS-III.0011	Each task can define its own time quanta and give up its time slice if it does not require the full time quanta .
MicroC/OS-III.0012	# The way the software structure is built allows easy porting to many other architectures .
MicroC/OS-III.0013	# Tasks Stacks feature allows using separate stacks with different sizes for each task thus permitting better footprint management .
MicroC/OS-III.0014	# The kernel can manage interrupts with up to 255 levels deep .
MicroC/OS-III.0015	# Signaling a task without a semaphore is possible .
MicroC/OS-III.0016	# It is Run-Time configurable .
MicroC/OS-III.0017	Goals Probably the most important goal of μC / OS-III was to make it compatible from an application 's standpoint of view .
MicroC/OS-III.0018	A μC / OS port might need to be modified to work with μC / OS-III but at least , the application code should require only minor changes .
MicroC/OS-III.0019	Also , because μC / OS-III is based on the same core as μC / OS II , it is just as reliable .
MicroC/OS-III.0020	This is especially useful when you have resource limited products .
MicroC/OS-III.0021	Kernel The kernel is the part of a multitasking system responsible for the management of tasks -LRB- that is , for managing the CPU 's time -RRB- and communication between tasks .
MicroC/OS-III.0022	The fundamental service provided by the kernel is context switching .
MicroC/OS-III.0023	The use of a real-time kernel will generally simplify the design of systems by allowing the application to be divided into multiple tasks managed by the kernel .
MicroC/OS-III.0024	A kernel will add overhead to your system because it requires extra ROM -LRB- code space -RRB- , additional RAM for the kernel data structures but most importantly , each task requires its own stack space which has a tendency to eat up RAM quite quickly .
MicroC/OS-III.0025	A kernel will also consume CPU time -LRB- typically between 2 and 5 % -RRB- .
MicroC/OS-III.0026	Single chip microcontrollers are generally not able to run a real-time kernel because they have very little RAM .
MicroC/OS-III.0027	A kernel can allow you to make better use of your CPU by providing you with indispensable services such as semaphore management , mailboxes , queues , time delays , etc. .
MicroC/OS-III.0028	Once you design a system using a real-time kernel , you will not want to go back to a foreground/background system .
MicroC/OS-III.0029	Scheduler The scheduler , also called the dispatcher , is the part of the kernel responsible for determining which task will run next .
MicroC/OS-III.0030	Most real-time kernels are priority based .
MicroC/OS-III.0031	Each task is assigned a priority based on its importance .
MicroC/OS-III.0032	The priority for each task is application specific .
MicroC/OS-III.0033	In a priority-based kernel , control of the CPU will always be given to the highest priority task ready-to-run .
MicroC/OS-III.0034	When the highest-priority task gets the CPU , however , is determined by the type of kernel used .
MicroC/OS-III.0035	There are two types of priority-based kernels : non-preemptive and preemptive .
MicroC/OS-III.0036	Task Management A task is a simple program that thinks it has the CPU all to itself .
MicroC/OS-III.0037	On a single CPU , only one task executes at any given time .
MicroC/OS-III.0038	μC / OS-III supports multitasking and allows the application to have any number of tasks .
MicroC/OS-III.0039	The maximum number of tasks is actually only limited by the amount of memory -LRB- both code and data space -RRB- available to the processor .
MicroC/OS-III.0040	A task can be implemented as a run-to-completion task in which the task deletes itself when it is finished or more typically as an infinite loop , waiting for events to occur and processing those events .
MicroC/OS-III.0041	A task needs to be created .
MicroC/OS-III.0042	When creating a task , it is necessary to specify the address of an OS_TCB to be used by the task , the priority of the task , and an area in RAM for the task 's stack .
MicroC/OS-III.0043	A task can also perform computations -LRB- CPU bound task -RRB- , or manage one or more I/O -LRB- Input/Output -RRB- devices .
MicroC/OS-III.0044	μC / OS-III creates up to five internal tasks : the idle task , tick task , ISR handler task , statistics task , and timer task .
MicroC/OS-III.0045	The idle and tick tasks are always created while statistics and timer tasks are optional .
MicroC/OS-III.0046	Task Priority A priority is assigned to each task .
MicroC/OS-III.0047	The more important the task , the higher the priority given to it .
MicroC/OS-III.0048	Static Priorities Task priorities are said to be static when the priority of each task does not change during the application 's execution .
MicroC/OS-III.0049	Each task is thus given a fixed priority at compile time .
MicroC/OS-III.0050	All the tasks and their timing constraints are known at compile time in a system where priorities are static .
MicroC/OS-III.0051	Dynamic Priorities Task priorities are said to be dynamic if the priority of tasks can be changed during the application 's execution ; each task can change its priority at run-time .
MicroC/OS-III.0052	This is a desirable feature to have in a real-time kernel to avoid priority inversions .
MicroC/OS-III.0053	Priority Inversions Priority inversion is a problem in real-time systems and occurs mostly when you use a real-time kernel .
MicroC/OS-III.0054	If Task 1 has a higher priority than Task 2 which in turn has a higher priority than Task 3 .
MicroC/OS-III.0055	Task 1 and Task 2 are both waiting for an event to occur and thus , Task 3 is executed .
MicroC/OS-III.0056	At some point , Task 3 acquires a semaphore that it needs before it can access a shared resource .
MicroC/OS-III.0057	Task 3 performs some operations on the acquired resource until it gets preempted by the high priority task , Task 1 .
MicroC/OS-III.0058	Task 1 executes for a while until it also wants to access the resource .
MicroC/OS-III.0059	Because Task 3 owns the resource , Task 1 will have to wait until Task 3 releases the semaphore .
MicroC/OS-III.0060	As Task 1 tries to get the semaphore , the kernel notices that the semaphore is already owned and thus , Task 1 gets suspended and Task 3 is resumed .
MicroC/OS-III.0061	Task 3 continues execution until it gets preempted by Task 2 because the event that Task 2 was waiting for occurred .
MicroC/OS-III.0062	Task 2 handles the event and when it 's done , Task 2 relinquishes the CPU back to Task 3 .
MicroC/OS-III.0063	Task 3 finishes working with the resource and thus , releases the semaphore .
MicroC/OS-III.0064	At this point , the kernel knows that a higher priority task is waiting for the semaphore and , a context switch is done to resume Task 1 .
MicroC/OS-III.0065	Now , Task 1 has the semaphore and can thus access the shared resource .
MicroC/OS-III.0066	The priority of Task 1 has been virtually reduced to that of Task 3 's because it was waiting for the resource that Task 3 owned .
MicroC/OS-III.0067	The situation got aggravated when Task 2 preempted Task 3 which further delayed the execution of Task 1 .
MicroC/OS-III.0068	A multitasking kernel should allow task priorities to change dynamically to help prevent priority inversions .
MicroC/OS-III.0069	However , it takes some time to change a task 's priority .
MicroC/OS-III.0070	Ports A port involves three aspects : CPU , OS and board specific -LRB- BSP -RRB- code .
MicroC/OS-III.0071	μC / OS-III port consists of writing or changing the contents of three kernel specific files - OS_CPU.H , OS_CPU_A .
MicroC/OS-III.0072	ASM and OS_CPU_C.C .
MicroC/OS-III.0073	It is necessary to write or change the content of three CPU specific files : CPU.H , CPU_A .
MicroC/OS-III.0074	ASM and CPU_C.C .
MicroC/OS-III.0075	Finally create or change a Board Support Package -LRB- BSP -RRB- for the evaluation board or target board being used .
MicroC/OS-III.0076	A μC / OS-III port is similar to a μC / OS-II port .
MicroC/OS-III.0077	Some ports available are : Altera : * Nios II Analog Devices : * Blackfin ARM : * ARM7TDMI * ARM720T * ARM920T * ARM926EJ-S * Cortex-M3 Atmel : * AVR * AVR32 * AT91SAMxxxxx -LRB- ARM7/9 -RRB- Freescale/Motorola : * 6800/01/02 / 03 * 6809 * 68HC08 * 68HC11 * 68HC12 * 68HC16 * 680xx * 683xx * MC9S12 * M683xx * MCF5272 * MCF5275 * i.MX21 * MC9S08 * MPC551x Fujitsu : * Softune IBM : * PowerPC 430 Ingenic : * jz4720/25/30 / 32/40/50 / 55 Intel : * 8080/85 * 80x86/88 Lattice Semiconductor : * Mico32 Microchip Technology : * PIC24 * dsPIC33 * PIC32 Mitsubishi : * M16C/80 Renesas * R8C * M32C NEC : * 78K4 * V850E NXP Semiconductors : * NXP LPC1700 OpenRISC : * OR12 Rabbit Inc : * Rabbit4000 * Rabbit5000 Renesas/Hitachi : * H8/3xx * H8/5xx * 64180 STMicroelectronics : * STM32 Texas Instruments : * MSP430 Xilinx : * MicroBlaze
Mind uploading.0000	bytes = `` 44244 '' > Whole brain emulation or mind uploading -LRB- sometimes called mind transfer -RRB- is the hypothetical process of transferring or copying a conscious mind from a brain to a non-biological substrate by scanning and mapping a biological brain in detail and copying its state into a computer system or another computational device .
Mind uploading.0001	The computer would have to run a simulation model so faithful to the original that it would behave in essentially the same way as the original brain , or for all practical purposes , indistinguishably .
Mind uploading.0002	The simulated mind is assumed to be part of a virtual reality simulated world , supported by an anatomic 3D body simulation model .
Mind uploading.0003	Alternatively , the simulated mind could be assumed to reside in a computer inside -LRB- or connected to -RRB- a humanoid robot or a biological body , replacing its brain .
Mind uploading.0004	Whole brain emulation is discussed by futurists as a `` logical endpoint '' of the topical computational neuroscience and neuroinformatics fields , both about brain simulation for medical research purposes .
Mind uploading.0005	It is discussed in artificial intelligence research publications as an approach to strong AI .
Mind uploading.0006	Among futurists and within the transhumanist movement it is an important proposed life extension technology , originally suggested in biomedical literature in 1971 .
Mind uploading.0007	It is a central conceptual feature of numerous science fiction novels and films .
Mind uploading.0008	Whole brain emulation is considered by some scientists as a theoretical and futuristic but possible technology , although mainstream research funders and scientific journals remain skeptical .
Mind uploading.0009	Several contradictory predictions have been made about when a whole human brain can be emulated ; some of the predicted dates have already passed .
Mind uploading.0010	Substantial mainstream research and development are however being done in relevant areas including development of faster super computers , virtual reality , brain-computer interfaces , animal brain mapping and simulation , connectomics and information extraction from dynamically functioning brains .
Mind uploading.0011	Critics of mind uploading as a means of life extension often dismiss it as wishful thinking , claiming that even an exact copy of oneself would constitute an entirely independent being , whose -LRB- identical -RRB- sentiments -LRB- joy , pain -RRB- are virtually irrelevant to the original , by any egoistical definition .
Mind uploading.0012	The question whether an emulated brain can be a human mind is debated by philosophers .
Mind uploading.0013	Overview The human brain contains about 85 billion nerve cells called neurons , each individually linked to other neurons by way of connectors called axons and dendrites .
Mind uploading.0014	Signals at the junctures -LRB- synapses -RRB- of these connections are transmitted by the release and detection of chemicals known as neurotransmitters .
Mind uploading.0015	The established neuroscientific consensus is that the human mind is largely an emergent property of the information processing of this neural network .
Mind uploading.0016	Importantly , neuroscientists have stated that important functions performed by the mind , such as learning , memory , and consciousness , are due to purely physical and electrochemical processes in the brain and are governed by applicable laws .
Mind uploading.0017	For example , Christof Koch and Giulio Tononi wrote in IEEE Spectrum : The concept of mind uploading is based on this mechanistic view of the mind , and denies the vitalist view of human life and consciousness .
Mind uploading.0018	Eminent computer scientists and neuroscientists have predicted that specially programmed computers will be capable of thought and even attain consciousness , including Koch and Tononi , Douglas Hofstadter , Jeff Hawkins , Marvin Minsky , Randal A. Koene , and Rodolfo Llinas .
Mind uploading.0019	Such a machine intelligence capability might provide a computational substrate necessary for uploading .
Mind uploading.0020	However , even though uploading is dependent upon such a general capability it is conceptually distinct from general forms of AI in that it results from dynamic reanimation of information derived from a specific human mind so that the mind retains a sense of historical identity -LRB- other forms are possible but would compromise or eliminate the life-extension feature generally associated with uploading -RRB- .
Mind uploading.0021	The transferred and reanimated information would become a form of artificial intelligence , sometimes called an infomorph or `` noömorph . ''
Mind uploading.0022	Many theorists have presented models of the brain and have established a range of estimates of the amount of computing power needed for partial and complete simulations .
Mind uploading.0023	Using these models , some have estimated that uploading may become possible within decades if trends such as Moore 's Law continue .
Mind uploading.0024	Assuming that sufficient computing power becomes available and most of the mental functions of an average human mind are programmed in software , there remains the question of how much of a person 's memories would be required to qualify as an uploaded mind .
Mind uploading.0025	In addition to memories of basic skills and knowledge that we learn as children , there are countless memories that make each persons mind different than other people 's .
Mind uploading.0026	Would a person 's memories of a childhood disease , or a bicycle accident , or a sports trophy received , or images of numerous friends and what they said years ago be required in such a mind upload ; these are issues that would have to be addressed .
Mind uploading.0027	Theoretical benefits `` Immortality '' / backup In theory , if the information and processes of the mind can be disassociated from the biological body , they are no longer tied to the individual limits and lifespan of that body .
Mind uploading.0028	Furthermore , information within a brain could be partly or wholly copied or transferred to one or more other substrates -LRB- including digital storage or another brain -RRB- , thereby - from a purely mechanistic perspective - reducing or eliminating `` mortality risk '' of such information .
Mind uploading.0029	This general proposal appears to have been first made in the biomedical literature in 1971 by biogerontologist George M. Martin of the University of Washington .
Mind uploading.0030	Speedup A computer-based intelligence such as an upload could potentially think much faster than a human even if it were no more intelligent .
Mind uploading.0031	Human neurons exchange electrochemical signals with a maximum speed of about 150 meters per second , whereas the speed of light is about 300 million meters per second , about two million times faster .
Mind uploading.0032	Also , neurons can generate a maximum of about 200 to 1000 action potentials or `` spikes '' per second , whereas the number of signals per second in modern computer chips is about 3 GHz -LRB- about two million times greater -RRB- and expected to increase by at least a factor 100 .
Mind uploading.0033	Therefore , even if the computer components responsible for simulating a brain were not significantly smaller than a biological brain , and even if the temperature of these components was not significantly lower , Eliezer Yudkowsky of the Singularity Institute for Artificial Intelligence calculates a theoretical upper bound for the speed of a future artificial neural network .
Mind uploading.0034	It could in theory run about 1 million times faster than a real brain , experiencing about a year of subjective time in only 31 seconds of real time .
Mind uploading.0035	However , such a massively parallel implementation would require separate computational units for each of the eighty-six billion neurons and each of the eighty-six trillion synapses .
Mind uploading.0036	That requires an enormously large computer or artificial neural network in comparison with today 's super-computers .
Mind uploading.0037	In a less futuristic implementation , time-sharing would allow several neurons to be emulated sequentially by the same computational unit .
Mind uploading.0038	Thus the size of the computer would be restricted , but the speedup would be lower .
Mind uploading.0039	Assuming that cortical minicolumns organized into hypercolumns are the computational units , mammal brains can be emulated by today 's super computers , but with slower speed than in a biological brain .
Mind uploading.0040	Space travel Mind uploading poses potential benefits for interstellar space travel because it would allow immortal beings to travel the cosmos without suffering from extreme acceleration .
Mind uploading.0041	A whole society of uploads can be emulated by a computer on a very small spaceship , similar to a space probe , that would consume much less fuel and may accelerate much more than space travels for biological humans .
Mind uploading.0042	The uploads would have control of the ship and would be able to make decisions about the crafts voyage in real time , independent of signals from Earth , that might eventually take months or years to reach the craft as it journeys out into the cosmos .
Mind uploading.0043	Because a virtual conscious can be set into a state of hibernation , or slowed down , the virtual minds need not experience the boredom of hundreds if not thousands of years of travel .
Mind uploading.0044	Instead they would only awake when on board computers detected that the craft had arrived at its destination .
Mind uploading.0045	In the book The Physics of Immortality -LRB- 1994 -RRB- , Frank Tipler suggests that the universe eventually would be colonized by such machine intelligence , which ultimately would try to turn all matter in the universe into energy and computational power .
Mind uploading.0046	Another possibility for travel would be wireless transmission of a person 's brain model between computers on already inhabited locations .
Mind uploading.0047	Such travel would require only the energy to transmit enough powerful signals suffently long time so that they reach the target destination .
Mind uploading.0048	The travelling time would be a sum of the wave propagation delay -LRB- depending on the distance -RRB- and the data transmission delay -LRB- depending on the possible bit rate , which depends on the distance and transmission power -RRB- ; both could constitute several years for inter-stellar travelling .
Mind uploading.0049	The travelers experienced time from transmitter to receiver would be instantaneous .
Mind uploading.0050	Relevant technologies and techniques Computational capacity Advocates of mind uploading point to Moore 's law to support the notion that the necessary computing power is expected to become available within a few decades .
Mind uploading.0051	However , the actual computational requirements for running an uploaded human mind are very difficult to quantify , potentially rendering such an argument specious .
Mind uploading.0052	Regardless of the techniques used to capture or recreate the function of a human mind , the processing demands are likely to be immense , due to the large number of neurons in the human brain along with the considerable complexity of each neuron .
Mind uploading.0053	In 2004 , Henry Markram , lead researcher of the `` Blue Brain Project '' , has stated that `` it is not -LSB- their -RSB- goal to build an intelligent neural network '' , based solely on the computational demands such a project would have .
Mind uploading.0054	It will be very difficult because , in the brain , every molecule is a powerful computer and we would need to simulate the structure and function of trillions upon trillions of molecules as well as all the rules that govern how they interact .
Mind uploading.0055	You would literally need computers that are trillions of times bigger and faster than anything existing today .
Mind uploading.0056	Five years later , after successful simulation of part of a rat brain , the same scientist was much more bold and optimistic .
Mind uploading.0057	In 2009 , when he was director of the Blue Brain Project , he claimed that A detailed , functional artificial human brain can be built within the next 10 years Required computational capacity strongly depend on the chosen level of simulation model scale : Simulation model scale Since the function of the human mind , and how it might arise from the working of the brain 's neural network , are poorly understood issues , mind uploading relies on the idea of neural network emulation .
Mind uploading.0058	Rather than having to understand the high-level psychological processes and large-scale structures of the brain , and model them using classical artificial intelligence methods and cognitive psychology models , the low-level structure of the underlying neural network is captured , mapped and emulated with a computer system .
Mind uploading.0059	In computer science terminology , rather than analyzing and reverse engineering the behavior of the algorithms and data structures that resides in the brain , a blueprint of its source code is translated to another programming language .
Mind uploading.0060	The human mind and the personal identity then , theoretically , is generated by the emulated neural network in an identical fashion to it being generated by the biological neural network .
Mind uploading.0061	On the other hand , a molecule-scale simulation of the brain is not expected to be required , provided that the functioning of the neurons is not affected by quantum mechanical processes .
Mind uploading.0062	The neural network emulation approach only requires that the functioning and interaction of neurons and synapses are understood .
Mind uploading.0063	It is expected that it is sufficient with a black-box signal processing model of how the neurons respond to nerve impulses -LRB- electrical as well as chemical synaptic transmission -RRB- .
Mind uploading.0064	A sufficiently complex and accurate model of the neurons is required .
Mind uploading.0065	A traditional artificial neural network model , for example multi-layer perceptron network model , is not considered as sufficient .
Mind uploading.0066	A dynamic spiking neural network model is required , which reflects that the neuron fires only when a membrane potential reaches a certain level .
Mind uploading.0067	It is likely that the model must include delays , non-linear functions and differential equations describing the relation between electrophysical parameters such as electrical currents , voltages , membrane states -LRB- ion channel states -RRB- and neuromodulators .
Mind uploading.0068	Since learning and long-term memory are believed to result from strengthening or weakening the synapses via a mechanism known as synaptic plasticity or synaptic adaptation , the model should include this mechanism .
Mind uploading.0069	The response of sensory receptors to various stimuli must also be modeled .
Mind uploading.0070	Furthermore , the model may have to include metabolism , i.e. how the neurons are affected by hormones and other chemical substances that may cross the blood -- brain barrier .
Mind uploading.0071	It is considered likely that the model must include currently unknown neuromodulators , neurotransmitters and ion channels .
Mind uploading.0072	It is considered unlikely that the simulation model has to include protein interaction , which would make it computationally complex .
Mind uploading.0073	A digital computer simulation model of an analog system such as the brain is an approximation that introduces random quantization errors and distortion .
Mind uploading.0074	However , the biological neurons also suffer from randomness and limited precision , for example due to background noise .
Mind uploading.0075	The errors of the discrete model can be made smaller than the randomness of the biological brain by choosing a sufficiently high variable resolution and sample rate , and sufficiently accurate models of non-linearities .
Mind uploading.0076	The computational power and computer memory must however be sufficient to run such large simulations , preferably in real time .
Mind uploading.0077	Scanning and mapping scale of an individual When modelling and simulating the brain of a specific individual , a brain map or connectivity database showing the connections between the neurons must be extracted from an anatomic model of the brain .
Mind uploading.0078	For whole brain simulation , this network map should show the connectivity of the whole nervous system , including the spinal cord , sensory receptors , and muscle cells .
Mind uploading.0079	Destructive scanning of a small sample of tissue from a mouse brain including synaptic details is possible as of 2010 .
Mind uploading.0080	However , if short-term memory and working memory include prolonged or repeated firing of neurons , as well as intra-neural dynamic processes , the electrical and chemical signal state of the synapses and neurons may be hard to extract .
Mind uploading.0081	The uploaded mind may then perceive a memory loss of the events and mental processes immediately before the time of brain scanning .
Mind uploading.0082	A full brain map has been estimated to occupy less than 2 x 1016 bytes -LRB- 20,000 TB -RRB- and would store the addresses of the connected neurons , the synapse type and the synapse `` weight '' for each of the brains ' 1015 synapses .
Mind uploading.0083	However , the biological complexities of true brain function -LRB- e.g. the epigenetic states of neurons , protein components with multiple functional states , etc. -RRB- may preclude an accurate prediction of the volume of binary data required to faithfully represent a functioning human mind .
Mind uploading.0084	Serial sectioning A possible method for mind uploading is serial sectioning , in which the brain tissue and perhaps other parts of the nervous system are frozen and then scanned and analyzed layer by layer , which for frozen samples at nano-scale requires a cryo-ultramicrotome , thus capturing the structure of the neurons and their interconnections .
Mind uploading.0085	The exposed surface of frozen nerve tissue would be scanned and recorded , and then the surface layer of tissue removed .
Mind uploading.0086	While this would be a very slow and labor intensive process , research is currently underway to automate the collection and microscopy of serial sections .
Mind uploading.0087	The scans would then be analyzed , and a model of the neural net recreated in the system that the mind was being uploaded into .
Mind uploading.0088	There are uncertainties with this approach using current microscopy techniques .
Mind uploading.0089	If it is possible to replicate neuron function from its visible structure alone , then the resolution afforded by a scanning electron microscope would suffice for such a technique .
Mind uploading.0090	However , as the function of brain tissue is partially determined by molecular events -LRB- particularly at synapses , but also at other places on the neuron 's cell membrane -RRB- , this may not suffice for capturing and simulating neuron functions .
Mind uploading.0091	It may be possible to extend the techniques of serial sectioning and to capture the internal molecular makeup of neurons , through the use of sophisticated immunohistochemistry staining methods that could then be read via confocal laser scanning microscopy .
Mind uploading.0092	However , as the physiological genesis of ` mind ' is not currently known , this method may not be able to access all of the necessary biochemical information to recreate a human brain with sufficient fidelity .
Mind uploading.0093	Brain imaging It may also be possible to create functional 3D maps of the brain activity , using advanced neuroimaging technology , such as functional MRI -LRB- fMRI , for mapping change in blood flow -RRB- , Magnetoencephalography -LRB- MEG , for mapping of electrical currents -RRB- , or combinations of multiple methods , to build a detailed three-dimensional model of the brain using non-invasive and non-destructive methods .
Mind uploading.0094	Today , fMRI is often combined with MEG for creating functional maps of human cortex during more complex cognitive tasks , as the methods complement each other .
Mind uploading.0095	Even though current imaging technology lacks the spatial resolution needed to gather the information needed for such a scan , important recent and future developments are predicted to substantially improve both spatial and temporal resolutions of existing technologies .
Mind uploading.0096	Current research Several animal brains have been mapped and at least partly simulated .
Mind uploading.0097	Simulation of C. elegans roundworm neural system The connectivity of the neural circuit for touch sensitivity of the simple C. elegans nematode -LRB- roundworm -RRB- was mapped in 1985 , and partly simulated in 1993 .
Mind uploading.0098	Several software simulation models of the complete neural and muscular system , and to some extent the worm 's physical environment , have been presented since 2004 , and are in some cases available for downloading .
Mind uploading.0099	However , we still lack understanding of how the neurons and the connections between them generate the surprisingly complex range of behaviors that are observed in this relatively simple organism .
Mind uploading.0100	Simulation of Drosophila fruit fly neural system The brain belonging to the fruit fly Drosophila is also thoroughly studied , and to some extent simulated .
Mind uploading.0101	Rodent brain simulation An artificial neural network described as being `` as big and as complex as half of a mouse brain '' was run on an IBM Blue Gene supercomputer by a University of Nevada research team in 2007 .
Mind uploading.0102	A simulated time of one second took ten seconds of computer time .
Mind uploading.0103	The researchers said they had seen `` biologically consistent '' nerve impulses flowed through the virtual cortex .
Mind uploading.0104	However , the simulation lacked the structures seen in real mice brains , and they intend to improve the accuracy of the neuron model .
Mind uploading.0105	Blue Brain is a project , launched in May 2005 by IBM and the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne , with the aim to create a computer simulation of a mammalian cortical column , down to the molecular level .
Mind uploading.0106	The project uses a supercomputer based on IBM 's Blue Gene design to simulate the electrical behavior of neurons based upon their synaptic connectivity and complement of intrinsic membrane currents .
Mind uploading.0107	The initial goal of the project , completed in December 2006 , was the simulation of a rat neocortical column , which can be considered the smallest functional unit of the neocortex -LRB- the part of the brain thought to be responsible for higher functions such as conscious thought -RRB- , containing 10,000 neurons -LRB- and 108 synapses -RRB- .
Mind uploading.0108	Between 1995 and 2005 , Henry Markram mapped the types of neurons and their connections in such a column .
Mind uploading.0109	In November 2007 , the project reported the end of the first phase , delivering a data-driven process for creating , validating , and researching the neocortical column .
Mind uploading.0110	The project seeks to eventually reveal aspects of human cognition and various psychiatric disorders caused by malfunctioning neurons , such as autism , and to understand how pharmacological agents affect network behavior .
Mind uploading.0111	An organization called the -LSB- http://www.brainpreservation.org Brain Preservation Foundation -RSB- was founded in 2010 and is offering a Brain Preservation Technology prize to promote exploration of brain preservation technology in service of humanity .
Mind uploading.0112	The Prize , currently $ 106,000 , will be awarded in two parts , 25 % to the first international team to preserve a whole mouse brain , and 75 % to the first team to preserve a whole large animal brain in a manner that could also be adopted for humans in a hospital or hospice setting immediately upon clinical death .
Mind uploading.0113	Ultimately the goal of this prize is to generate a whole brain map which may be used in support of separate efforts to upload and possibly ` reboot ' a mind in virtual space .
Mind uploading.0114	Issues Legal , ethical , political and economical issues If simulated worlds would come true , it may be difficult to ensure the protection of human rights .
Mind uploading.0115	For example , social science researchers might be tempted to secretly expose simulated minds , or whole isolated societies of simulated minds , to controlled experiments in which many copies of the same minds are exposed -LRB- serially or simultaneously -RRB- to different test conditions .
Mind uploading.0116	The only limited physical resource to be expected in a simulated world is the computational capacity , and thus the speed and complexity of the simulation .
Mind uploading.0117	Wealthy or privileged individuals in a society of uploads might thus experience more subjective time than others in the same real time , or may be able to run multiple copies of themselves or others , and thus produce more service and become even more wealthy .
Mind uploading.0118	Others may suffer from computational resource starvation and show a slow motion behavior .
Mind uploading.0119	Copying vs. moving Another philosophical issue with mind uploading is whether an uploaded mind is really the `` same '' sentience , or simply an exact copy with the same memories and personality ; or , indeed , what the difference could be between such a copy and the original -LRB- see the Swampman thought experiment -RRB- .
Mind uploading.0120	This issue is especially complex if the original remains essentially unchanged by the procedure , thereby resulting in an obvious copy which could potentially have rights separate from the unaltered , obvious original .
Mind uploading.0121	Most projected brain scanning technologies , such as serial sectioning of the brain , would necessarily be destructive , and the original brain would not survive the brain scanning procedure .
Mind uploading.0122	But if it can be kept intact , the computer-based consciousness could be a copy of the still-living biological person .
Mind uploading.0123	It is in that case implicit that copying a consciousness could be as feasible as literally moving it into one or several copies , since these technologies generally involve simulation of a human brain in a computer of some sort , and digital files such as computer programs can be copied precisely .
Mind uploading.0124	It is usually assumed that once the versions are exposed to different sensory inputs , their experiences would begin to diverge , but all their memories up until the moment of the copying would remain the same .
Mind uploading.0125	The problem is made even more serious by the possibility of creating a potentially infinite number of initially identical copies of the original person , which would of course all exist simultaneously as distinct beings .
Mind uploading.0126	The most parsimonious view of this phenomenon is that the two -LRB- or more -RRB- minds would share memories of their past but from the point of duplication would simply be distinct minds -LRB- although this is complicated by merging -RRB- .
Mind uploading.0127	Many complex variations are possible .
Mind uploading.0128	Depending on computational capacity , the simulation may run at faster or slower simulation time as compared to the elapsed physical time , resulting in that the simulated mind would perceive that the physical world is running in slow motion or fast motion respectively , while biological persons will see the simulated mind in fast or slow motion respectively .
Mind uploading.0129	A brain simulation can be started , paused , backed-up and rerun from a saved backup state at any time .
Mind uploading.0130	The simulated mind would in the latter case forget everything that has happened after the instant of backup , and perhaps not even be aware that it is repeating itself .
Mind uploading.0131	An older version of a simulated mind may meet a younger version and share experiences with it .
Mind uploading.0132	Bekenstein bound The Bekenstein bound is an upper limit on information that can be contained within a given finite region of space which has a finite amount of energy or , conversely , the maximum amount of information required to perfectly describe a given physical system down to the quantum level .
Mind uploading.0133	An average human brain has a weight of 1.5 kg and a volume of 1260 cm3 .
Mind uploading.0134	The energy -LRB- E m · c2 -RRB- will be 1.34813 · 1017 J and if the brain is approximate to a sphere then the radius -LRB- V 4 · π · r3/3 -RRB- will be 6.70030 · 10 − 2 m .
Mind uploading.0135	The Bekenstein bound -LRB- I ≤ -RRB- for an average human brain would be 2.58991 · 1042 bit and represents an upper bound on the information needed to perfectly recreate the average human brain down to the quantum level .
Mind uploading.0136	This implies that the number of different states -LRB- Ω = 2I -RRB- of the human brain -LRB- and of the mind if the physicalism is true -RRB- is at most 107.79640 · 1041 .
Mind uploading.0137	However , as described above , many mind uploading advocates expect that quantum-level models and molecule-scale simulation of the neurons will not be needed , so the Bekenstein bound only represents a maximum upper limit .
Mind uploading.0138	The hippocampus of a human adult brain has been estimated to store a limit of up to 2.5 petabyte of binary data equivalent .
Mind uploading.0139	Mind uploading in science fiction Mind uploading advocates Mind uploading is also advocated by a number of researchers in neuroscience and artificial intelligence , such as Marvin Minsky .
Mind uploading.0140	In 1993 , Joe Strout created a small web site called the Mind Uploading Home Page , and began advocating the idea in cryonics circles and elsewhere on the net .
Mind uploading.0141	That site has not been actively updated in recent years , but it has spawned other sites including -LSB- http://www.minduploading.org/ MindUploading.org -RSB- , run by Randal A. Koene , Ph.D. , who also moderates a mailing list on the topic .
Mind uploading.0142	These advocates see mind uploading as a medical procedure which could eventually save countless lives .
Mind uploading.0143	Many transhumanists look forward to the development and deployment of mind uploading technology , with transhumanists such as Nick Bostrom predicting that it will become possible within the 21st century due to technological trends such as Moore 's Law .
Mind uploading.0144	The book Beyond Humanity : CyberEvolution and Future Minds by Gregory S. Paul & Earl D. Cox , is about the eventual -LRB- and , to the authors , almost inevitable -RRB- evolution of computers into sentient beings , but also deals with human mind transfer .
Mind uploading.0145	Richard Doyle 's Wetwares : Experiments in PostVital Living deals extensively with uploading from the perspective of distributed embodiment , arguing for example that humans are currently part of the `` artificial life phenotype . ''
Mind uploading.0146	Doyle 's vision reverses the polarity on uploading , with artificial life forms such as uploads actively seeking out biological embodiment as part of their reproductive strategy .
Mind uploading.0147	Raymond Kurzweil , a prominent advocate of transhumanism and the likelihood of a technological singularity , has suggested that the easiest path to human-level artificial intelligence may lie in `` reverse-engineering the human brain '' , which he usually uses to refer to the creation of a new intelligence based on the general `` principles of operation '' of the brain , but he also sometimes uses the term to refer to the notion of uploading individual human minds based on highly detailed scans and simulations .
Mind uploading.0148	This idea is discussed on pp. 198 -- 203 of his book The Singularity is Near , for example .
Carlos Amado Molina.0000	bytes = `` 12960 '' > This article is about the Mexican boxer .
Carlos Amado Molina.0001	For the American boxer , see Carlos Molina .
Carlos Amado Molina.0002	Carlos Amado Molina -LRB- born May 25 , 1983 in Pátzcuaro , Michoacán , Mexico -RRB- is a Mexican professional boxer in the Light Middleweight division .
Carlos Amado Molina.0003	He is the former WBO NABO Light Middleweight Champion .
Carlos Amado Molina.0004	Amateur career Carlos started his amateur career at age eighteen and ended up with a record of 6-1 , he would turn professional after only 2 years .
Carlos Amado Molina.0005	Professional career In December , 2005 , Molina fought the current undefeated WBC Middleweight Champion Mexican , Julio César Chávez , Jr. to a controversial draw , which many observers felt Molina deserved .
Carlos Amado Molina.0006	In February 2006 , he lost to Chavez in a rematch by a six round majority decision .
Carlos Amado Molina.0007	This bout was held at the The Aladdin in Las Vegas , Nevada .
Carlos Amado Molina.0008	After suffering another majority decision loss to Mike Alvarado , Molina scored 9 consecutive wins , including a unanimous decision victory over Danny Perez for the WBO NABO light middleweight title .
Carlos Amado Molina.0009	However , he would remain inactive for the following year and a half after a dispute with his promoter Don King .
Carlos Amado Molina.0010	On March 25 , 2011 , Molina fought undefeated Olympic gold medalist Erislandy Lara to a disputed majority draw .
Carlos Amado Molina.0011	Many at ringside thought Molina deserved the decision .
Carlos Amado Molina.0012	The final scores were 97-93 for Molina and 95-95 on the two other scorecards .
Carlos Amado Molina.0013	Molina then scored a TKO victory over Allen Conyers .
Carlos Amado Molina.0014	In his next fight , Molina upset former world champion Kermit Cintron , on Showtime .
Carlos Amado Molina.0015	Professional record | - style = `` margin :0.5 em auto ; font-size :95 % ; '' | style `` text-align : center ; '' colspan `` 8 '' | 21 Wins -LRB- 6 Knockouts -RRB- , 5 Losses , 2 Draws | - style = `` text-align : center ; margin :0.5 em auto ; font-size :95 % ; background : #e 3e3e3 ; '' | style = `` border-style : none none solid solid ; '' | Res .
Carlos Amado Molina.0016	| style = `` border-style : none none solid solid ; '' | Record | style = `` border-style : none none solid solid ; '' | Opponent | style = `` border-style : none none solid solid ; '' | Type | style = `` border-style : none none solid solid ; '' | Rd. , Time | style = `` border-style : none none solid solid ; '' | Date | style = `` border-style : none none solid solid ; '' | Location | style = `` border-style : none none solid solid ; '' | Notes | - align = center | Win | | 21-5-2 | | align = left | Cory Spinks | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 20-5-2 | | align = left | Damian Frias | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Loss | | 19-5-2 | | align = left | James Kirkland | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 19-4-2 | | align = left | Kermit Cintron | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 18-4-2 | | align = left | Allen Conyers | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | style `` background : #B 0C4DE '' | Draw | | 17-4-2 | | align left | Erislandy Lara | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 17-4-1 | | align = left | Danny Perez | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 16-4-1 | | align = left | Ed Paredes | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 15-4-1 | | align = left | Alexis Camacho | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 14-4-1 | | align = left | Jailer Berrio | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 13-4-1 | | align = left | Roberto Valenzuela | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 12-4-1 | | align = left | Donald Camarena | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 11-4-1 | | align = left | Cedrick Armstrong | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 10-4-1 | | align = left | Luciano Perez | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 9-4-1 | | align = left | Henry Mitchell | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Loss | | | 8-4-1 | | align = left | Mike Alvarado | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Loss | | | 8-3-1 | | align = left | Wayland Willingham | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Loss | | | 8-2-1 | | align = left | Julio Cesar Chavez Jr. | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | style `` background : #B 0C4DE '' | Draw | | | 8-1-1 | | align left | Julio Cesar Chavez Jr. | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 8-1 | | align = left | Loyal Goodman | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 8-1 | | align = left | Joseph Pujoe | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 6-1 | | align = left | Antoine Elerson | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 5-1 | | align = left | Joe Lynch | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 4-1 | | align = left | Adam Capo | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Loss | | | 3-1 | | align = left | Jonathan Ochoa | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 3-0 | | align = left | Nick Farrow | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 2-0 | | align = left | Vance Garvey | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 1-0 | | align = left | James Rice | | | | | | align = left | | align = left | | - align = center
Carlos Molina.0000	bytes = `` 8251 '' > Carlos Molina -LRB- born November 18 , 1985 , in Commerce , California -RRB- is a Mexican American professional boxer in the Lightweight division .
Carlos Molina.0001	He 's also the brother of two Olympic Boxers -LRB- Twins -RRB- Javier for the U.S. and Oscar who fights for Mexico .
Carlos Molina.0002	Amateur career Molina had a very good amateur career , that ended with a record of 105-20 .
Carlos Molina.0003	Professional career On the same Showtime boxing card of Márquez-Vázquez IV , Carlos scored a decision win over veteran Humberto Tapia .
Carlos Molina.0004	Carlos faced his first defeat of his professional career from British Pakistani boxer Amir Khan in December 2012 .
Carlos Molina.0005	Professional boxing record | - style = `` margin :0.5 em auto ; font-size :95 % ; '' | align `` center '' colspan 8 | 17 Wins -LRB- 7 knockouts -RRB- , 1 Loss -LRB- 1 knockout -RRB- , 1 Draw | - style = `` margin :0.5 em auto ; font-size :95 % ; '' | aligncenter style `` border-style : none none solid solid ; background : #e 3e3e3 '' | Res .
Carlos Molina.0006	| aligncenter style `` border-style : none none solid solid ; background : #e 3e3e3 '' | Record | aligncenter style `` border-style : none none solid solid ; background : #e 3e3e3 '' | Opponent | aligncenter style `` border-style : none none solid solid ; background : #e 3e3e3 '' | Type | aligncenter style `` border-style : none none solid solid ; background : #e 3e3e3 '' | Rd. , Time | aligncenter style `` border-style : none none solid solid ; background : #e 3e3e3 '' | Date | aligncenter style `` border-style : none none solid solid ; background : #e 3e3e3 '' | Location | aligncenter style `` border-style : none none solid solid ; background : #e 3e3e3 '' | Notes | - align = center | Loss | | 17-1-1 | | align = left | Amir Khan | TKO | | 10 | | December 15 , 2012 | | align = left | Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena , California , USA | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 17-0-1 | | align = left | Marcos Leonardo Jimenez | UD | | 10 | | June 16 , 2012 | | align = left | Convention Center McAllen , Texas , USA | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 16-0-1 | | align = left | Angino Perez | UD | | 10 | | March 17 , 2012 | | align = left | Convention Center Pharr , Texas , USA | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 15-0-1 | | align = left | Manuel Leyva | UD | | 10 | | December 03 , 2011 | | align = left | Honda Center Anaheim , California , USA | align = left | | - align = center | style `` background : #B 0C4DE '' | Draw | | 14-0-1 | | align left | Juan Montiel | SD | | 8 | | November 13 , 2010 | | align = left | Hard Rock Hotel and Casino , The Joint , Las Vegas , Nevada | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 14-0-0 | | align = left | John Figueroa | UD | | 8 | | November 18 , 2010 | | align = left | Club Nokia , Los Angeles , California | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 13-0-0 | | align = left | Glenn Gonzales | RTD | | 5 , -LRB- 3:00 -RRB- | | August 13 , 2010 | | align = left | Sports Arena , Pico Rivera , California | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 12-0-0 | | align = left | Humberto Tapia | UD | | 8 | | May 22 , 2010 | | align = left | Staples Center , Los Angeles , California | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 11-0-0 | | align = left | Hensley Strachan | UD | | 4 | | February 25 , 2010 | align = left | Club Nokia , Los Angeles , California | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 10-0-0 | | align = left | Tyler Ziolkowski | TKO | | 1 , -LRB- 0:54 -RRB- | | January 29 , 2010 | | align = left | Hard Rock Hotel and Casino , Las Vegas , Nevada | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 9-0-0 | | align = left | Antony Nelson | KO | | 1 , -LRB- 2:13 -RRB- | | August 27 , 2009 | | align = left | Club Nokia , Los Angeles , California | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 8-0-0 | | align = left | Ever Luis Perez | TKO | | 4 , -LRB- 2:39 -RRB- | | July 30 , 2009 | | align = left | Club Nokia , Los Angeles , California | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 7-0-0 | | align = left | Anthony Martinez | UD | | 6 | | May 21 , 2009 | | align = left | Hard Rock Hotel , San Diego , California | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 6-0-0 | | align = left | Genier Pit | KO | | 4 , -LRB- 2:17 -RRB- | | December 12 , 2008 | | align = left | Alameda Swap Meet , Los Angeles , California | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 5-0-0 | | align = left | Eligio Valenzuela | TKO | | 4 , -LRB- 1:41 -RRB- | | October 17 , 2008 | | align = left | Quiet Cannon , Montebello , California | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 4-0-0 | | align = left | Ramon Flores | TKO | | 2 , -LRB- 2:47 -RRB- | | July 30 , 2008 | | align = left | Sycuan Resort & Casino , El Cajon , California | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 3-0-0 | | align = left | Odilon Rivera | UD | | 4 | | June 19 , 2008 | | align = left | Marriott Hotel , Irvine , California | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 2-0-0 | | align = left | Ricardo Martinez | UD | | 4 | | August 18 , 2007 | | align = left | Soboba Casino , San Jacinto , California | align = left | | - align = center | Win | | 1-0-0 | | align = left | Mario Juarez | UD | | 4 | | May 25 , 2007 | | align = left | Doubletree Hotel , Ontario , California | align = left | Pro debut | - align = center
Mythological Cycle.0000	bytes = `` 27377 '' > The Mythological Cycle is a somewhat outdated coined term still used to refer collectively to ancient literary tradition that concern the godlike peoples who allegedly arrived in five migratory invasions into Ireland , and principally recount the doings of the Tuatha Dé Danann .
Mythological Cycle.0001	It comprises one of the four major cycles of early Irish literary tradition , the others being the Ulster cycle , the Fenian Cycle and the Cycle of the Kings .
Mythological Cycle.0002	The topic is also surveyed under Irish mythology , Mythological cycle .
Mythological Cycle.0003	A list of literature belonging to the cycle is given below .
Mythological Cycle.0004	Overview The characters appearing in the cycle are for all intents and purposes are gods from the pre-Christian pagan past in Ireland .
Mythological Cycle.0005	However , commentators exercising caution qualify them as representing only `` godlike '' beings , and not gods .
Mythological Cycle.0006	This is because the Christian scribes who composed the writings were generally -LRB- though not always -RRB- careful not to refer to the Tuatha Dé Danann and other beings explicitly as deities .
Mythological Cycle.0007	They are nonetheless thinly veiled disguises , and in these writings are discernable vestiges of early Irish polytheistic cosmology -LRB- World view -RRB- .
Mythological Cycle.0008	Examples of works from the cycle include numerous prose tales , verse texts , as well as pseudo-historical chronicles -LRB- primarily the Lebor Gabála Érenn -LRB- LGE -RRB- , commonly called The Book of Invasions -RRB- found in medieval vellum manuscripts or later copies .
Mythological Cycle.0009	Some of the romances are of later composition and found only in paper manuscripts dating to near-modern times -LRB- Cath Maige Tuired and The Fate of the Children of Tuireann -RRB- .
Mythological Cycle.0010	Near-modern histories such as the Annals of the Four Masters and Geoffrey Keating 's History of Ireland -LRB- = Seathrún Céitinn , Foras Feasa ar Éirinn -RRB- are also sometimes considered viable sources , since they may offer additional insights with their annotated and interpolated reworkings of LGE accounts .
Mythological Cycle.0011	Orally transmitted folk-tales may also be , in a broad sense , considered mythological cycle material , notably , the folk-tales that describe Cian 's tryst with Balor 's daughter while attempting to recover the bountiful cow Glas Gaibhnenn .
Mythological Cycle.0012	The god-folk of the successive invasions are `` euhemerised '' , i.e. , described as having dwelled terrestrially and ruling over Ireland in kingship before the age of mortal men -LRB- the Milesians , or their descendants -RRB- .
Mythological Cycle.0013	Afterwards , the Tuatha Dé Danann are said to have retreated into the sídhe -LRB- fairy mounds -RRB- , cloaking their presence by raising the féth fiada -LRB- fairy mist -RRB- .
Mythological Cycle.0014	Having disappeared but not died , the deities oftentimes make `` guest appearances '' in narratives categorized under other cycles .
Mythological Cycle.0015	-LRB- e.g. , Lugh 's appearance as the divine father and Morrígan as nemesis to the Ulster hero Cuchulainn ; encounters of Finnian characters with dwellers of the sidhe ; Cormac mac Airt 's , or his grandfather 's visits to the otherworldly realms . -RRB-
Mythological Cycle.0016	Collected #lore literature , while they do not belong to the cycle in entirety , nevertheless capture tidbits of lore about the deities .
Mythological Cycle.0017	Lists of Literature In the list that follows , citations are generally only given if the wiki page for that work is not developed .
Mythological Cycle.0018	Otherwise , citations are deferred to the wiki article in question .
Mythological Cycle.0019	See #External links for additional titles .
Mythological Cycle.0020	prose tales * Aislinge Óenguso -LRB- `` Dream of Angus '' -RRB- -LRB- remscél to TBC -RRB- * Altram Tige Dá Medar -LRB- `` The Fosterage of the House of Two -LSB- Milk - -RSB- Vessels '' -RRB- -LRB- ; Called `` Tale of Curchóg '' by O'Curry -RRB- .
Mythological Cycle.0021	* Cath Muige Tuired Cunga -LRB- `` The -LSB- First -RSB- Battle of Mag Tuired of Cong '' -RRB- * Cath Maige Tuired -LRB- `` The Second Battle of Mag Tuired '' -RRB- * Ceithri cathracha i r-robadar Tuatha De Danand -LRB- '' -LSB- The four jewels of the Tuatha Dé Danann | The Four Jewels of the Tuatha Dé Danann -RSB- '' -RRB- * De Gabáil in t-Sída -LRB- `` The Taking of the Fairy Mound '' -RRB- -LRB- remscél to TBC -RRB- -LRB- -RRB- * Echtra Nera -LSB- i -RSB- -LRB- `` The Adventures of Nera '' -RRB- -LRB- remscél to TBC -RRB- * Eachtra Léithín -LRB- `` The Adventures of Léithín '' -RRB- -LRB- mod .
Mythological Cycle.0022	versions ; -RRB- * `` How the Dagda Got His Magic Staff . ''
Mythological Cycle.0023	-LRB- Bergin , 1927 -RRB- * Oidheadh Chloinne Lir -LRB- `` The Fate of the Children of Lir '' -RRB- * Oidheadh Chloinne Tuirenn -LRB- `` The Fate of the Children of Tuirenn '' -RRB- -LRB- late romance -RRB- * Scél Tuáin meic Chairill -LRB- `` The Story of Tuán son of Cairell '' -RRB- * Tochomlod Nemid co hErin -LRB- ? -RRB-
Mythological Cycle.0024	-LRB- `` The Invasion of Nemed '' -RRB- -LRB- frag. ; -RRB- * Tochomlod mac Miledh a hEspain i nErind .
Mythological Cycle.0025	-LRB- `` The Progress of the Sons of Mil from Spain to Ireland '' -RRB- -LRB- -RRB- .
Mythological Cycle.0026	verse texts Besides independent verses , a number of poems are embedded in prose tales , etc. .
Mythological Cycle.0027	A number of them are also preserved in the pseudohistorical LGE , Keating , etc. .
Mythological Cycle.0028	* Arsaidh sin a eóuin Accla -LRB- `` Fintan and the Hawk of Aicill '' -RRB- * Coire Érmai / Coire Goriath -LRB- `` The Cauldron of Poesy '' -RRB- lore Collected lore are not wholly of mythological content , but parts of it are .
Mythological Cycle.0029	`` The Fitness of Names '' -LRB- # 149-159 , etc. -RRB- provides interesting explanations on names of Dian Cecht among others .
Mythological Cycle.0030	Irish onomastica , the Dindshenchas , also include stories about deities such as Boann -LRB- under Inber Colptha -RRB- , the Dagda -LRB- under Fidh nGaible -RRB- , Brecan -LRB- Coire Brecain -RRB- , often in developed narrative verse or prose tales .
Mythological Cycle.0031	Genealogical tracts and the Roll of the Kings , various glosses -LRB- e.g. to the law treatise Senchus Mor -RRB- may also be culled for information .
Mythological Cycle.0032	* Banshenchus -LRB- `` History of Women '' -RRB- * Cóir Anmann -LRB- `` The Fitness of Names '' -RRB- : * Dindsenchas -LRB- `` Lore of Places '' -RRB- * Sanas Cormaic -LRB- `` Cormac 's Glossary '' -RRB- : Nes -LSB- s -RSB- -LRB- Nescoit -RRB- * Triads of Ireland : mention of the indeoin Dagdai , ox of Díl , etc. .
Mythological Cycle.0033	pseudohistory * Chronicon Scotorum * Lebor Gabála Érenn folk-tales * Glas Gaibhnenn Survey of prose tales The euhemerized deities arrived in five sets of migrations -LRB- see #The invasions tradition -RRB- , but none of the individual migrations tales -LRB- ; sing .
Mythological Cycle.0034	tochomlod -RRB- survived intact .
Mythological Cycle.0035	Remnants of the migration tales are the summarized accounts given in the LGE -LRB- Book of Invasions -RRB- .
Mythological Cycle.0036	Apart from these are the tale of Tuan mac Cairill , Fintan mac Bóchra colloquy -LRB- see #Verse -RRB- .
Mythological Cycle.0037	Tuan and Fintan are ancient beings from the Antediluvian past , who have reincaranted into different creatures , and are referred to in the LGE as well .
Mythological Cycle.0038	Of the battle tales -LRB- ; sing .
Mythological Cycle.0039	cath -RRB- , the full narratives of the First and Second Battle of Moytura -LRB- Battles of Mag Tuired -RRB- survive in relatively late -LRB- 16th cent . -RRB-
Mythological Cycle.0040	manuscripts .
Mythological Cycle.0041	Other important battle tales such as the Cath Tailten -LRB- Battle of Tailten -RRB- or Orgain Tuir Chonaind -LRB- `` Massacre of Conan 's Tower '' -RRB- are lost , though abstracted in the LGE The late romance of Oidheadh Chloinne Tuireann -LRB- `` The Fate of the Children of Tuireann '' -RRB- tells how Lugh fines the sons of Tuireann for his father Cian 's murder , compelling them to collect a series of magical objects and weapons which will be useful in the second battle of Mag Tuired against the Fomorians .
Mythological Cycle.0042	An earlier version of this is recorded in the LGE , with a somewhat different list of fines -LRB- eiric -RRB- , with no indication the murder happened on the eve of the great battle .
Mythological Cycle.0043	In the Oidheadh Chloinne Lir -LRB- `` The Fate of the Children of Lir '' -RRB- , the eponymous children are turned into swans by their jealous stepmother , and live in swan form into Christian times , when they are converted , transformed back into human form , and die of extreme old age .
Mythological Cycle.0044	Tochmarc Étaíne -LRB- `` The Wooing of Étaín '' -RRB- tells first of the conception of Aengus through the adultery of the Dagda and Boann , and how Aengus won the residence of the Brú na Bóinne from Boann 's husband Elcmar .
Mythological Cycle.0045	It goes on to tell of the various lives of Étaín , wife of Midir , who is turned into a fly and driven away by Midir 's jealous first wife Fuamnach .
Mythological Cycle.0046	She becomes the companion of Aengus in insect form before Fuamnach once again drives her away , and she is swallowed by a mortal woman and reborn as her daughter .
Mythological Cycle.0047	Her beauty attracts the attention of the High King , Eochaid Airem , who marries her , but ultimately Midir wins her back by magic and trickery .
Mythological Cycle.0048	There is also a curious account regarding Goídel Glas , the legendary ancestor of the migratory races and eponymous creator of the Gaelic language , and how he was cured by Moses 's rod from a snake bite , related to in the LGE , although Macalister is dimissive of it as fiction invented by glossators .
Mythological Cycle.0049	The invasions tradition The Mythological Cycle traces the supposed history of Ireland from its earliest inhabitants before the Biblical flood , through a series of invasions to the arrival of the Goidelic-speaking Milesians or Gaels .
Mythological Cycle.0050	Some of these invaders probably represent genuine historical migrations ; others , like the Tuatha Dé Danann with their magical powers , are unquestionably degraded gods .
Mythological Cycle.0051	The primary text of this tradition is the Lebor Gabála Érenn -LRB- `` Book of Invasions of Ireland '' -RRB- .
Mythological Cycle.0052	Elements of the tradition are expended in saga texts such as the two Battles of Mag Tuired , and in early modern compilations such as the Annals of the Four Masters and Geoffrey Keating 's Foras Feasa ar Éireann .
Mythological Cycle.0053	Before the flood A number of traditions have been preserved about the earliest inhabitants of Ireland .
Mythological Cycle.0054	The best known tradition is that of Cessair , which is recorded in the Lebor Gabála Érenn and other early texts .
Mythological Cycle.0055	Cessair is said to have been a granddaughter of Noah for whom there was no room on the Ark. .
Mythological Cycle.0056	She and her followers -- fifty women and three men -- arrived only 40 days before the deluge and were wiped out , all except Fintan , who transformed into a salmon .
Mythological Cycle.0057	Through a series of transformations he survived into historical times and told the tale of his people .
Mythological Cycle.0058	Geoffrey Keating , in his 17th century Foras Feasa ar Éirinn -LRB- `` The Basics of Knowledge on Ireland '' -RRB- , records several other traditions from sources now lost .
Mythological Cycle.0059	A poem he found in the Saltair of Cashel said that three daughters of the Biblical Cain were the first to see Ireland .
Mythological Cycle.0060	A second tradition , a variant of the Cessair legend he found in the Book of Druimm Snechta , said that the first inhabitants of Ireland were led by a woman called Banba , who gave her name to the island .
Mythological Cycle.0061	She came with a hundred and fifty women and three men , who lived there for forty years before they all died of plague , two hundred years before the flood .
Mythological Cycle.0062	Another tradition he records , but does not source , is that Ireland was discovered by three fishermen from Iberia who were washed there by a storm .
Mythological Cycle.0063	They returned to Iberia , brought their wives and settled in Ireland a year before the flood , when they were drowned .
Mythological Cycle.0064	After the flood Although the Lebor Gabála says Ireland was empty of inhabitants for three hundred years after the flood , Keating records two contrary traditions .
Mythological Cycle.0065	A poem from the Saltair of Cashel said that a young man called Adna , son of Bíth , a relative of Ninus of Nineveh , visited Ireland about a hundred and forty years after the flood , but merely plucked a fistful of grass and brought it home to show his neighbours .
Mythological Cycle.0066	He also says that , according to `` some of our authors '' , the Fomorians , led by Cichol Gricenchos , settled in Ireland a hundred years after the flood and lived there for two hundred years until they were defeated by Partholón and his followers in the Battle of Mag Ithe .
Mythological Cycle.0067	The Fomorians are said to have lived on `` fish and fowl '' , and Partholón is said in the Lebor Gabála to have introduced cattle and houses to Ireland : Partholón According to the Lebor Gabála , Partholón and his followers settled in Ireland either three hundred or three hundred and twelve years after the flood .
Mythological Cycle.0068	Said to have been a descendant of Magog , son of Japheth , son of Noah , Partholón is said to have sailed from Greece , via Sicily , to Iberia , and from there to Ireland .
Mythological Cycle.0069	He landed at Imber Scéne -LRB- Kenmare , County Kerry -RRB- .
Mythological Cycle.0070	His four oxen were the first cattle in Ireland .
Mythological Cycle.0071	One of his followers , Brea , was the first to build a house , and another , Samailiath , was the first to brew ale .
Mythological Cycle.0072	When they arrived there was only one plain in Ireland -- Senmag , the `` Old Plain '' , near modern Tallaght .
Mythological Cycle.0073	Four more plains were cleared during Partholón 's lifetime , and seven lakes burst from the ground .
Mythological Cycle.0074	He and all his followers -- five thousand men and four thousand women -- died of plague in a single week , with one exception -- Tuan mac Cairill , who , like Fintan , survived through a series of transformations and told the story of his people to St Finnian .
Mythological Cycle.0075	Nemed and his followers Thirty years later another group , led by Nemed , arrived .
Mythological Cycle.0076	The Lebor Gabála describes them as Greeks from Scythia , and says they sailed with forty-four ships , but only one ship survived to reach Ireland .
Mythological Cycle.0077	Four lakes burst from the ground in Nemed 's time , twelve plains were cleared , and three battles won against the Fomorians .
Mythological Cycle.0078	Nemed eventually died of plague , and his descendants were subjected by the Fomorian leaders Morc and Conand , who demanded two-thirds of their children , wheat and milk as tribute .
Mythological Cycle.0079	Nemed 's son Fergus Lethderg and grandsons Semul and Erglan led a revolt against Conand 's Tower on Tory Island , off the coast of County Donegal , and Conand was killed , but Morc led a counter-attack .
Mythological Cycle.0080	The sea rose up and drowned them all , except for one ship containing thirty warriors , who left Ireland and scattered to the four corners of the world .
Mythological Cycle.0081	Fergus Lethderg 's son Britan Mael became the ancestor of the Britons .
Mythological Cycle.0082	Semeon went to Greece and became the ancestor of the Fir Bolg .
Mythological Cycle.0083	Bethach went to the islands of the north and became the ancestor of the Tuatha Dé Danann .
Mythological Cycle.0084	Fir Bolg The next invaders were the Fir Bolg , who first established kingship and a system of justice in Ireland .
Mythological Cycle.0085	One of their kings , Rinnal , was the first to use iron spear-points .
Mythological Cycle.0086	According to a controversial theory of T. F. O'Rahilly , they represent a genuine historical people , the Builg or Belgae , associated further with the Iverni .
Mythological Cycle.0087	Tuatha Dé Danann The Fir Bolg were displaced by the Tuatha Dé Danann or `` Peoples of the goddess Danu '' , descendants of Nemed , who either came to Ireland from the north on dark clouds or burnt their ships on the shore to ensure they would n't retreat .
Mythological Cycle.0088	They defeated the Fir Bolg king , Eochaid mac Eirc , in the first Battle of Magh Tuiredh , but their own king , Nuada , lost an arm in the battle .
Mythological Cycle.0089	As he was no longer physically perfect he lost the kingship , and his replacement , the half-Fomorian Bres , became the first Tuatha Dé High King of Ireland .
Mythological Cycle.0090	Bres turned out to be a tyrant and brought the Tuatha Dé under the oppression of the Fomorians .
Mythological Cycle.0091	Eventually Nuada was restored to the kingship , having had his arm replaced by a working one of silver , and the Tuatha Dé rose against the Fomorians in the second Battle of Magh Tuiredh .
Mythological Cycle.0092	Nuada was killed by the Fomorian king , Balor , but Balor met his prophesied end at the hands of his grandson , Lugh , who became king of the Tuatha Dé .
Mythological Cycle.0093	The Tuatha Dé are said to have brought chariots and druidry to Ireland .
Mythological Cycle.0094	The Sons of Míl The Tuatha Dé Danann were themselves displaced by the Milesians , descendants of Míl Espáine , a warrior who travelled the ancient world before settling in Iberia .
Mythological Cycle.0095	Míl died without ever seeing Ireland , but his uncle Íth saw the island from a tower and led an advance force to scout it out .
Mythological Cycle.0096	The three kings of the Tuatha Dé , Mac Cuill , Mac Cecht and Mac Gréine , had Íth killed .
Mythological Cycle.0097	After his body was returned to Iberia , Míl 's eight sons led a full-scale invasion .
Mythological Cycle.0098	After defeating the Tuatha Dé in battle at Slieve Mish , County Kerry , the Milesians met Ériu , Banba and Fodla , the wives of the three kings , each of whom asked them to name the island after her .
Mythological Cycle.0099	Ériu is the origin of the modern name Éire , and Banba and Fodla are still used as poetic names for Ireland , much as Albion is for Great Britain .
Mythological Cycle.0100	Mac Cuill , Mac Cecht and Mac Gréine asked for a three-day truce in which the Milesians would stay at anchor nine waves ' distance from shore , and the Milesians agreed , but the druids of the Tuatha Dé conjured up a storm to drive them away .
Mythological Cycle.0101	However Amergin , son of Míl , calmed the sea with his poetry .
Mythological Cycle.0102	The Milesians landed and defeated the Tuatha Dé at Tailtiu , but only three of Míl 's sons , Eber Finn , Eremon and Amergin , survived .
Mythological Cycle.0103	Amergin divided the land between his two brothers .
Mythological Cycle.0104	The Tuatha Dé moved underground , into the sídhe mounds , to be ruled by Bodb Dearg .
Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri.0000	bytes = `` 3380 '' > Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri was a 15th century astronomer and mathematician from Kerala , India .
Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri.0001	Origins Parameshwaran Nambudiri -LRB- 1360-1450 CE -RRB- was born into the Vatasseri Mana -LRB- a Nambudiri Brahmin family -RRB- on the northern bank of the Nila River -LRB- Bharathapuzha -RRB- near Aswatha Gramam -LRB- near present Tirur of Malappuram district -RRB- .
Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri.0002	He was a Rigvedi of the Bhrigu Gothram .
Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri.0003	His son Damodharan Nambhudiri was a well known Indian mathematician .
Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri.0004	They were members of the Kerala School of Mathematics and Astronomy founded by Madava -LRB- who is known for the Madhava series , which he discovered about two centuries before Gregory and Leibniz did -RRB- .
Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri.0005	Contributions Parameshwaran was a student of Madavan Nambudiri of Sangamagrama , modern day Irinjalakuda .
Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri.0006	As a result of over fifty years of systematic observations and research on the movements of celestial bodies , estimated the error factor and established a new method called Drig Sidhham .
Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri.0007	This method is explained in his famous work Driganitham -LRB- 1431 AD -RRB- .
Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri.0008	Another of his contribution was a correction to the angle of precision of the equinox mentioned by his disciple , Kelalloor Somayaji in his Jyothirmeemaamsa .
Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri.0009	The 13 1/2 ° suggested by Mujjaalakan was rectified by Parameshwaran to 15 ° .
Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri.0010	Publications Other works include the 3-volume , 302 verse Gola Deepika -LRB- 1443 AD -RRB- explaining the stars and earth in very simple terms , Jaathaka Padhhathy in 41 verses , Soorya Sidhhantha Vivaranam , Grahana Mandanam , Grahanaashtakam , Vyatheepaathaashtaka Vrththi in 500 verses .
Vatasseri Parameshwaran Nambudiri.0011	He has written superb commentaries such as Sidhhantha Deepika on Govindaswamy 's Mahaa Bhaaskareeyam ; Karma Deepika or Bhata Deepika on Aarya Bhateeyam ; Muhoortha Rathna Vyaakhyaa on Govindaswamy 's Muhoortha Rathnam ; Leelavathee Vyaakhyaa on the famous mathematical treatise , Leelavathy of Bhaskara II ; Laghu Bhaaskareeya Vyaakhyaa on Laghu Bhaaskareeyam of Bhaskara I ; Jaathaka Karma Padhhathee Vyaakhyaa on Sreepathy 's 8-chapter work on Jyothisham ; the one on Laghu Maanasam of Mujjaalakan ; Jaathakaadesa Vyaakhyaa ; and Prasna-Nashta Panchaasikaavrthy also called Paarameswari based on the work of Prathhuyasass , son of Varaahamihiran .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0000	bytes = `` 36451 '' > Lebor Gabála Érenn -LRB- The Book of the Taking of Ireland -RRB- is the Middle Irish title of a loose collection of poems and prose narratives recounting the mythical origins and history of the Irish from the creation of the world down to the Middle Ages .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0001	An important record of the folkloric history of Ireland , it was compiled and edited by an anonymous scholar in the 11th century , and might be described as a mélange of mythology , legend , history , folklore and Christian historiography .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0002	It is usually known in English as The Book of Invasions or The Book of Conquests , and in Modern Irish as Leabhar Gabhála Éireann or Leabhar Gabhála na hÉireann .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0003	Origins Purporting to be a literal and accurate account of the history of the Irish , Lebor Gabála Érenn -LRB- hereinafter abbreviated as LGE -RRB- may be seen as an attempt to provide the Irish with a written history comparable to that which the Israelites provided for themselves in the Old Testament .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0004	Drawing upon the pagan myths of Celtic Ireland -- both Gaelic and pre-Gaelic -- but reinterpreting them in the light of Judaeo-Christian theology and historiography , it describes how the island was subjected to a succession of invasions , each one adding a new chapter to the nation 's history .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0005	Biblical paradigms provided the mythologers with ready-made stories which could be adapted to their purpose .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0006	Thus we find the ancestors of the Irish enslaved in a foreign land , or fleeing into exile , or wandering in the wilderness , or sighting the `` Promised Land '' from afar .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0007	Four Christian works in particular seem to have had a significant bearing on the formation of LGE : * St Augustine 's De Civitate Dei , The City of God , -LRB- 413-426 AD -RRB- * Orosius 's Historiae adversum paganos , `` Histories , '' -LRB- 417 -RRB- * Eusebius 's Chronicon , translated into Latin by St Jerome as the Temporum liber -LRB- 379 -RRB- * Isidore of Seville 's Etymologiae -LRB- `` Etymologies '' -RRB- , or Origines -LRB- `` Origins '' -RRB- -LRB- early 7th century -RRB- The pre-Christian elements , however , were never entirely effaced .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0008	One of the poems in LGE , for instance , recounts how goddesses from among the Tuatha Dé Danann took Gaelic husbands when the Gael invaded and colonised Ireland .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0009	Furthermore , the pattern of successive invasions which LGE preserves is curiously reminiscent of Timagenes of Alexandria 's account of the origins of another Celtic people , the Gauls of continental Europe .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0010	Cited by the 4th century historian Ammianus Marcellinus , Timagenes -LRB- 1st century BC -RRB- describes how the ancestors of the Gauls were driven from their native lands in eastern Europe by a succession of wars and floods .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0011	Numerous fragments of Irish pseudohistory are scattered throughout the 7th and 8th centuries , but the earliest extant account is to be found in the Historia Brittonum or `` History of the Britons , '' considered by some to have been written by the Welsh priest Nennius in 829-830 .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0012	This text gives two separate accounts of early Irish history .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0013	The first consists of a series of successive colonisations from Iberia by the pre-Gaelic races of Ireland , all of which found their way into LGE .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0014	The second recounts the origins of the Gael themselves , and tells how they in turn came to be the masters of the country and the ancestors of all the Irish .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0015	These two stories continued to be enriched and elaborated upon by Irish bards throughout the 9th century .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0016	In the 10th and 11th centuries , several long historical poems were written that were later incorporated into the scheme of LGE .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0017	However , most of the poems on which the original version of LGE was based were written by the following four poets : * Eochaidh Ua Floinn -LRB- 936-1004 -RRB- from Armagh -- Poems 30 , 41 , 53 , 65 , 98 , 109 , 111 * Flann Mainistrech mac Echthigrin -LRB- died 1056 -RRB- , lector and historian of Monasterboice Abbey -- Poems ?
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0018	42 , 56 , 67 , ?
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0019	82 * Tanaide -LRB- died c. 1075 -RRB- -- Poems 47 , 54 , 86 * Gilla Cómáin mac Gilla Samthainde -LRB- fl .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0020	1072 -RRB- -- Poems 13 , 96 , 115 It was late in the 11th century that a single anonymous scholar appears to have brought together these and numerous other poems and fitted them into an elaborate prose framework - partly of his own composition and partly drawn from older , no longer extant sources - which paraphrased and enlarged upon the verse .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0021	The result was the earliest version of LGE .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0022	It was written in Middle Irish , a form of Irish Gaelic used between 900 and 1200 .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0023	Textual variants and sources From the beginning , LGE proved to be an enormously popular and influential document , quickly acquiring canonical status .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0024	Older texts were altered to bring their narratives into closer accord with its version of history , and numerous new poems were written and inserted into it .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0025	Within a century of its compilation there existed a plethora of copies and revisions , with as many as 136 poems between them .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0026	Five recensions of LGE are now extant , surviving in more than a dozen medieval manuscripts : * First Redaction -LRB- R ¹ -RRB- : preserved in The Book of Leinster -LRB- c. 1150 -RRB- and The Book of Fermoy -LRB- 1373 -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0027	* Míniugud -LRB- Min -RRB- : this recension is closely related to the Second Redaction .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0028	It is probably older than the surviving MSS of that redaction , though not older than the now lost exemplar on which those MSS were based .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0029	The surviving sources are suffixed to copies of the Second Redaction .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0030	* Second Redaction -LRB- R ² -RRB- : survives in no less than seven separate texts , the best known of which is The Great Book of Lecan -LRB- 1418 -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0031	* Third Redaction -LRB- R ³ -RRB- : preserved in both The Book of Ballymote -LRB- 1391 -RRB- and The Great Book of Lecan .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0032	* O'Clery 's Redaction -LRB- K -RRB- : written in 1631 by Mícheál Ó Cléirigh , a Franciscan scribe and one of the Four Masters .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0033	Unlike the earlier versions of LGE , this redaction is in Early Modern Irish but was admitted as an independent redaction by Macalister because there are indications that the author had access to sources which are no longer extant and which were not used by the compilers of the other four redactions .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0034	The work was compiled in the convent of Lisgool , near Enniskillen .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0035	O'Clery was assisted by Gillapatrick O'Luinin and Peregrine O'Clery -LRB- Michael O Clery 's third cousin once removed , and one of the Four Masters -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0036	The following table summarizes the extant manuscripts that contain versions of LGE .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0037	Most of the abbreviations used are taken from R. A. S. Macalister 's critical edition of the work -LRB- see references for details -RRB- : * K is contained in several paper manuscripts , but K ¹ , the `` authoritative autograph '' , takes precedence .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0038	Modern criticism For many centuries LGE was accepted without question as an accurate and reliable account of the history of Ireland .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0039	As late as the 17th century , Geoffrey Keating drew on it while writing his history of Ireland , Foras Feasa ar Éirinn , and it was also used extensively by the authors of the Annals of the Four Masters .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0040	In 1905 Charles Squire defended the antiquity of these legends with this statement : `` The scribes of the earlier Gaelic manuscripts very often found , in the documents from which they themselves were copying , words so archaic as to be unintelligible to the readers of their own period .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0041	To render them comprehensible , they were obliged to insert marginal notes which explained these obsolete words by reference to other manuscripts more ancient still '' .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0042	Recently , however , the work has been subjected to greater critical scrutiny .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0043	One contemporary scholar has placed it in `` the tradition of historical fabrication or pseudohistory '' ; another has written of its `` generally spurious character '' and has drawn attention to its many `` fictions '' , while acknowledging that it `` embodies some popular traditions .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0044	The Irish archaeologist R. A. Stewart Macalister , who translated the work into English , was particularly dismissive of it : `` There is not a single element of genuine historical detail , in the strict sense of the word , anywhere in the whole compilation '' .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0045	While scholars are still highly critical of the work , there is a general consensus that LGE does contain an account of the early history of Ireland , albeit a distorted one .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0046	The most contested claim in the work is the assertion that the Gaelic conquest took place in the remote past -- around 1500 BC -- and that all the inhabitants of Christian Ireland were descendants of these early Gaelic invaders .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0047	O'Rahilly , however , believed that the Gaelic conquest - depicted in LGE as the Milesian settlement - was the latest of the Celtic occupations of Ireland , taking place probably after 150 BC , and that many of Ireland 's pre-Gaelic peoples continued to flourish for centuries after it .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0048	The British poet and mythologist Robert Graves may be cited as one of the relatively few modern scholars who did not share the scepticism of Macalister and O'Rahilly .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0049	In his seminal work The White Goddess -LRB- 1948 -RRB- , Graves argued that ancient knowledge was transmitted orally from generation to generation by the druids of pre-literate Ireland .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0050	Taking issue with Macalister , with whom he corresponded on this and other matters , he declared some of LGE 's traditions `` archaeologically plausible '' .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0051	The White Goddess itself has been the subject of critical and skeptical comment ; nevertheless , it must be acknowledged that Graves did find some striking links between Celtic and Near Eastern mythology that are difficult to explain unless one is willing to accept that myths brought to Ireland centuries before the introduction of writing were preserved and transmitted accurately by word of mouth before being written down in the Christian Era .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0052	LGE was translated into French in 1884 .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0053	The first complete English translation was made by R. A. Stewart Macalister between 1937 and 1942 .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0054	It was accompanied by an apparatus criticus , Macalister 's own notes and an introduction , in which he made clear his own view that LGE was a conflation of two originally independent works : a History of the Gaedil , modelled after the history of the Israelites as set forth in the Old Testament , and an account of several pre-Gaelic settlements of Ireland -LRB- to the historicity of which Macalister gave very little credence -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0055	The latter was then inserted into the middle of the other work , interrupting it at a crucial point of the narrative .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0056	Macalister theorized that the quasi-Biblical text had been a scholarly Latin work entitled Liber Occupationis Hiberniae -LRB- `` The Book of the Taking of Ireland '' -RRB- , thus explaining why the Middle Irish title of LGE refers to only one `` taking '' , while the text recounts more than half a dozen .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0057	Contents There now follows a brief outline of the text of LGE .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0058	The work can be divided into ten `` books '' : Genesis A retelling of the familiar Judaeo-Christian story of the creation , the fall of Man and the early history of the world .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0059	In addition to Genesis , the author draws upon several recondite works for many of his details -LRB- e.g. the Syriac Cave of Treasures -RRB- , as well as the four Christian works mentioned earlier -LRB- i.e. .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0060	The City of God , etc. -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0061	Early history of the Gaels A pseudo-Biblical account of the origin of the Gaels as the descendants of the Scythian prince Fénius Farsaid , one of seventy-two chieftains who built the Tower of Babel .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0062	His grandson Goídel Glas , whose mother is Scota , daughter of a Pharaoh of Egypt , creates the Irish language from the original seventy-two languages that arose at the time of the dispersal of the nations .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0063	His descendants , the Gaels , undergo a series of trials and tribulations that are clearly modelled on those with which the Israelites are tried in the Old Testament .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0064	They flourish in Egypt at the time of Moses and leave during the Exodus ; they wander the world for four hundred and forty years before eventually settling in the Iberian Peninsula .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0065	There , Goídel 's descendant Breogán founds a city called Brigantia , and builds a tower from the top of which his son Íth glimpses Ireland .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0066	Brigantia can probably be identified with A Coruña , north-west Galicia , known as Brigantium in Roman times ; A Roman lighthouse there known as the Tower of Hercules has been claimed to have been built on the site of Breogán 's tower .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0067	Cessair This book , according to Macalister 's scheme , constitutes the first interpolation in the Liber Occupationis .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0068	Cessair is the granddaughter of the Biblical Noah , who advises her and her father , Bith , to flee to the western edge of the world on account of the impending Flood .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0069	They set out in three ships , but when they arrive in Ireland two of the ships are lost .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0070	The only survivors are Cessair , forty-nine other women , and three men -LRB- Cessair 's husband Fintán mac Bóchra , her father Bith , and the pilot Ladra -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0071	The women are divided among the men , Fintán taking Cessair and sixteen women , Bith taking Cessair 's companion Bairrfhind and sixteen women , and Ladra taking the remaining sixteen women .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0072	Ladra , however , soon dies -LRB- the first man to be buried on Irish soil -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0073	Forty days later the Flood ensues .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0074	Fintán alone survives by spending a year under the waters in a cave called `` Fintán 's Grave '' .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0075	Afterwards known as `` The White Ancient '' , he lives for 5500 years after the Deluge and witnesses the later settlements of the island in the guises of a salmon , an eagle and a hawk .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0076	Partholón Three hundred years after the Flood , Partholón , who , like the Gaels , is a descendant of Noah 's son Japheth , settles in Ireland with his three sons and their people .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0077	After ten years of peace , war breaks out with the Fomorians , a race of evil seafarers led by Cichol Gricenchos .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0078	The Partholonians are victorious , but their victory is short-lived .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0079	In a single week , they are wiped out by a plague -- five thousand men and four thousand women -- and are buried on the Plain of Elta to the southwest of Dublin , in an area that is still called Tallaght , which means `` plague grave '' .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0080	A single man survives the plague , Tuan mac Cairill , who -LRB- like Fintán mac Bóchra -RRB- survives for centuries and undergoes a succession of metamorphoses , so that he can act as a witness of later Irish history .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0081	This book also includes the story of Delgnat , Partholón 's wife , who commits adultery with a henchman .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0082	Nemed Thirty years after the extinction of the Partholonians , Ireland is settled by the people of Nemed , whose great-grandfather was a brother of Partholón 's .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0083	During their occupation , the land is once again ravaged by the Fomorians and a lengthy war ensues .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0084	Nemed wins three great battles against the Fomorians , but after his death his people are subjugated by two Fomorian leaders , Morc and Conand .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0085	Eventually , however , they rise up and assault Conand 's Tower on Tory Island .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0086	They are victorious , but an ensuing sea battle against Morc results in the destruction of both armies .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0087	A flood covers Ireland , wiping out most of the Nemedians .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0088	A handful of survivors are scattered to the four corners of the world .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0089	Fir Bolg One group of the seed of Nemed settled in Greece , where they were enslaved .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0090	Two hundred and thirty years after Nemed they flee and return to Ireland .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0091	There they separate into three nations : the Fir Bolg , Fir Domnann and the Fir Gálioin .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0092	They hold Ireland for just thirty-seven years before the invasion of the Tuatha Dé Danann .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0093	Tuatha Dé Danann The Tuatha Dé Danann are descendants of another group of the scattered seed of Nemed .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0094	They return to Ireland from the far north , where they have learned the arts of pagan magic and druidry , on or about May 1 .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0095	They contest the ownership of Ireland with the Fir Bolg and their allies in the First Battle of Moytura -LRB- or Mag Tuired -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0096	The Tuatha Dé are victorious and drive the Fir Bolg into exile among the neighbouring islands .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0097	But Nuada , the king of the Tuatha Dé , loses his right arm in the battle and is forced to renounce his crown .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0098	For seven unhappy years the kingship is held by the half-Fomorian Bres before Nuada 's physician Dian Cécht fashions for him a silver arm , and he is restored .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0099	War with the Fomorians breaks out and a decisive battle is fought : the Second Battle of Moytura .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0100	Nuada falls to Balor of the Evil Eye , but Balor 's grandson , Lugh of the Long Arm , kills him and becomes king .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0101	The Tuatha Dé Danann enjoy one hundred and fifty years of unbroken rule .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0102	Milesians The story of the Gaels , which was interrupted at the end of Book 2 , is now resumed .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0103	Íth , who has spied Ireland from the top of Breogán 's Tower , journeys to Ireland to investigate his discovery .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0104	There he is welcomed by the rulers , but jealous nobles kill him and his men return to Iberia with his body .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0105	The Milesians , or sons of his uncle Míl Espáine , set out to avenge his death and conquer the island .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0106	When they arrive in Ireland , they advance to Tara , the royal seat , to demand the kingship .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0107	On the way they are greeted in turn by three women , Banba , Fodla and Ériu , who are the queens of the three co-regents of the land .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0108	Each woman welcomes the Milesians and tells them that her name is the name by which the land is known , and asks that it remain so if the Milesians are victorious in battle .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0109	One of the Milesians , the poet Amergin , promises that it shall be so .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0110	At Tara they are greeted by the three kings of the Tuatha Dé Danann , who defend their claim to the joint kingship of the land .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0111	It is decided that the Milesians must return to their ships and sail out to sea to a distance of nine waves from the shore , so that the Tuatha Dé Danann may have a chance to mobilise their forces .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0112	But when the Milesians are `` beyond nine waves '' , the druids of the Tuatha Dé Danann conjure up a ferocious storm .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0113	The Milesian fleet is driven out to sea but Amergin dispels the wind with his poetry .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0114	Of the surviving ships those of Éber land at Inber Scéine -LRB- the Shannon estuary -RRB- in the west of the country , while those of Érimón land at Inber Colptha -LRB- the mouth of the Boyne -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0115	In two ensuing battles at Sliabh Mis and Tailtiu , the Tuatha Dé Danann are defeated .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0116	They are eventually driven out and the lordship of Ireland is divided between Éber and Éremón .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0117	Roll of the pagan kings of Ireland Modelled on the Biblical Books of Kings , this book recounts the deeds of various kings of Ireland , most of them legendary or semi-legendary , from the time of Éber and Érimón to the early 5th century of the Christian era .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0118	Roll of the Christian kings of Ireland A continuation of the previous book .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0119	This book is the most accurate part of LGE , being concerned with historical kings of Ireland whose deeds and dates are preserved in contemporary written records .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0120	O'Rahilly 's interpretation The manner in which Celtic-speaking peoples came to be in possession of the island of Ireland is still a matter of conjecture .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0121	However , four separate invasions or migrations were distinguished by the Celtic scholar T. F. O'Rahilly -LRB- see O'Rahilly 's historical model ; the dates given below are highly doubtful -RRB- : * Pretanic - Between about 700 and 500 BC P-Celtic-speaking people colonised Britain and Ireland from the continent .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0122	There is no real evidence of an organised military invasion , but by the 6th century ancient Greek geographers knew these islands as `` the Pretanic Isles '' .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0123	In Britain they were absorbed by later invaders , except in the extreme north , where they were known to the Romans as Picti , or `` painted peoples . ''
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0124	In Ireland their descendants -- wherever they managed to preserve some measure of cultural , if not political , independence -- were known as the Cruthin , a Gaelic or Q-Celtic form of Priteni , which is believed to be their original name for themselves .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0125	The name `` Britain '' is thought to be derived from Priteni .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0126	* or Ernean - The Builg or Érainn were various names of another P-Celtic-speaking people who invaded Ireland around 500 BC .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0127	They might be linked with the continental Belgae , and of the same stock as the Britons .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0128	According to their own traditions , they came to Ireland via Britain .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0129	In Irish pseudohistory they appear as the Fir Bolg , a name which was variously interpreted as meaning `` men of bags '' -LRB- Latin viri bulgarum -RRB- or `` belly men '' , though `` men of the thunderbolt '' would probably be more accurate .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0130	* Laginian - Around 300 BC three closely related tribes arrived in Ireland , known as the Laigin , the Domnainn and the Gálioin .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0131	They are speculated to have been P-Celtic-speaking tribes from Armorica -LRB- Brittany -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0132	In Ireland they conquered the southeastern quarter of the country -- which became known as Laighean , or Leinster , after them -- and the west -LRB- Connacht -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0133	The Érainn , however , would have remained in control of the north and south .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0134	This is perhaps how Ireland first came to be divided into four provinces .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0135	Some of these tribes also settled in Britain -LRB- possibly from Ireland -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0136	In the southwest the Domnainn -LRB- Latin : Dumnonii -RRB- gave their name to Devon , while in the northwest they founded Dumbarton and the Kingdom of Strathclyde .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0137	* Goidelic or Gaelic - Around 100 BC a Q-Celtic-speaking people invaded Ireland , traditionally said to be people from north-western Iberia where Gallaecian was spoken although O'Rahilly favoured Aquitania , in southwest Gaul .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0138	They arrived in two separate contingents : the Connachta , who landed at the mouth of the Boyne and carved out a fifth province for themselves -LRB- later known as Meath -RRB- around Tara between Ulster and Leinster ; and the Eoganachta , who insinuated themselves into Munster and gradually became the dominant force in the south of the country .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0139	Goidel -- or Gael -- may have originated as a P-Celtic name that the native population gave to these invaders , but in any event they themselves adopted the name .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0140	So how is this reconstruction of the history reflected in LGE ?
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0141	To begin with , if the Cruthin had an invasion myth , no trace of it remains in LGE , which supports the belief that their colonisation of the country was a lengthy process of gradual migration .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0142	And the first two `` takings '' of Ireland -- those of Cessair and Partholón -- seem to be wholly fanciful , with no direct historical value at all .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0143	The next taking , however , that of the Nemedians , may well have been a mythologised version of the historical invasion of the 5th or 6th century BC .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0144	This belief is supported by many details in the text of LGE , a discussion of which is beyond the scope of this article .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0145	The next two takings would also seem to have a historical basis .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0146	We can identify the Fir Bolg and their allies with the Érainn again , invading the country for a second time because their ancestors the Nemedians were portrayed as having abandoned the country -LRB- which the historical Érainn probably never did -RRB- .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0147	The Tuatha Dé Danann might be a wholly mythical people who have been substituted for the historical Lagin , Domnainn and Gálioin .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0148	It has been suggested that this confused state of affairs arose because the Laginian invasion was not a true taking , since the Laginians only conquered about half the country .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0149	Nevertheless , the First Battle of Moytura probably does reflect an historical victory of the Lagin over the Érainn in County Sligo -LRB- the location of two townlands known as West and East Moytirra -RRB- , by virtue of which the Lagin conquered the western province .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0150	The Second Battle of Moytura , however , would then have been entirely fictional , as most likely were the Fomorians .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0151	The Milesian invasion is clearly a semi-legendary version of the historical Goidelic invasion .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0152	Éber and Éremón -LRB- whose names mean simply `` Irishman '' and `` Ireland '' , respectively -RRB- have replaced the historical leaders of the Eoganachta and Connachta respectively .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0153	In the case of Éber , the allusion may be to Iberia , an ancient name for the Iberian Peninsula , whence doubtless warriors of Celtiberian stock originated and emigrated to Ireland .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0154	The name of their father Míl Espáne is similarly derived from the Latin Miles Hispaniae , `` a soldier of Hispania . ''
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0155	O'Rahilly , however , believed that the Goidelic invaders of Ireland came from south-western Gaul and not Iberia .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0156	See O'Rahilly -LRB- 1946 -RRB- for further discussion .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0157	The Roll of the Kings before the Introduction of Christianity contains much that is of interest to historians , but a lot of it is confused and bowdlerised .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0158	For example , the story of Tuathal Techtmar , who is depicted as a High King of Ireland in the early 2nd century of the Christian era , is thought to be another version of the Goidelic invasion , Tuathal Techtmar being in reality the historical antecedent of Éremón .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0159	Éber 's real antecedent , Mug Nuadat , would then be similarly displaced .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0160	There are also doublets of the and Laginian invasions in the stories of two other kings , Lugaid mac Dáire and Labraid Loingsech .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0161	These bowdlerisations may have been politically motivated : by providing the pre-Gaelic peoples of the island with pedigrees going back to Míl , the Gaels hoped to deny them any prior claim to the country , and so justify the Gaelic conquest .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0162	As mentioned earlier , The Roll of the Kings after the Introduction of Christianity is the most accurate part of LGE .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0163	For the most part , these kings are familiar to us from other sources .
Lebor Gabála Érenn.0164	It should also be pointed out that whereas the first eight books of LGE are usually regarded as part of the Early Mythological Cycle , the last two books are properly assigned to the Historical Cycle .
Neuroinformatics.0000	bytes = `` 36140 '' > Neuroinformatics is a research field concerned with the organization of neuroscience data by the application of computational models and analytical tools .
Neuroinformatics.0001	These areas of research are important for the integration and analysis of increasingly large-volume , high-dimensional , and fine-grain experimental data .
Neuroinformatics.0002	Neuroinformaticians provide computational tools , mathematical models , and create interoperable databases for clinicians and research scientists .
Neuroinformatics.0003	Neuroscience is a heterogeneous field , consisting of many and various sub-disciplines -LRB- e.g. , Cognitive Psychology , Behavioral Neuroscience , and Behavioral Genetics -RRB- .
Neuroinformatics.0004	In order for our understanding of the brain to continue to deepen , it is necessary that these sub-disciplines are able to share data and findings in a meaningful way ; Neuroinformaticians facilitate this .
Neuroinformatics.0005	Neuroinformatics stands at the intersection of neuroscience and information science .
Neuroinformatics.0006	Other fields , like genomics , have demonstrated the effectiveness of freely-distributed databases and the application of theoretical and computational models for solving complex problems .
Neuroinformatics.0007	In Neuroinformatics , such facilities allow researchers to more easily quantitatively confirm their working theories by computational modeling .
Neuroinformatics.0008	Additionally , neuroinformatics fosters collaborative research -- an important fact that facilitates the field 's interest in studying the multi-level complexity of the brain .
Neuroinformatics.0009	There are three main directions where neuroinformatics has to be applied : # the development of tools and databases for management and sharing of neuroscience data at all levels of analysis , # the development of tools for analyzing and modeling neuroscience data , # the development of computational models of the nervous system and neural processes .
Neuroinformatics.0010	In the recent decade , as vast amounts of diverse data about the brain were gathered by many research groups , the problem was raised of how to integrate the data from thousands of publications in order to enable efficient tools for further research .
Neuroinformatics.0011	The biological and neuroscience data are highly interconnected and complex , and by itself , integration represents a great challenge for scientists .
Neuroinformatics.0012	Combining informatics research and brain research provides benefits for both fields of science .
Neuroinformatics.0013	On one hand , informatics facilitates brain data processing and data handling , by providing new electronic and software technologies for arranging databases , modeling and communication in brain research .
Neuroinformatics.0014	On the another hand , enhanced discoveries in the field of neuroscience will invoke the development of new methods in information technologies -LRB- IT -RRB- .
Neuroinformatics.0015	History Starting in 1989 , the United States National Institute of Mental Health -LRB- NIMH -RRB- , the National Institute of Drug Abuse -LRB- NIDA -RRB- and the National Science Foundation -LRB- NSF -RRB- provided the National Academy of Sciences Institute of Medicine with funds to undertake a careful analysis and study of the need to create databases , share neuroscientific data and to examine how the field of information technology could create the tools needed for the increasing volume and modalities of neuroscientific data .
Neuroinformatics.0016	The positive recommendations were reported in 1991 -LRB- `` Mapping The Brain And Its Functions .
Neuroinformatics.0017	Integrating Enabling Technologies Into Neuroscience Research . ''
Neuroinformatics.0018	National Academy Press , Washington , D.C. ed .
Neuroinformatics.0019	Pechura , C.M. , and Martin , J.B. -RRB- This positive report enabled NIMH , now directed by Allan Leshner , to create the `` Human Brain Project '' -LRB- HBP -RRB- , with the first grants awarded in 1993 .
Neuroinformatics.0020	The HBP was led by Koslow along with cooperative efforts of other NIH Institutes , the NSF , the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Department of Energy .
Neuroinformatics.0021	The HPG and grant-funding initiative in this area slightly preceded the explosive expansion of the World Wide Web .
Neuroinformatics.0022	From 1993 through 2004 this program grew to over 100 million dollars in funded grants .
Neuroinformatics.0023	Next , Koslow pursued the globalization of the HPG and neuroinformatics through the European Union and the Office for Economic Cooperation and Development -LRB- OECD -RRB- , Paris , France .
Neuroinformatics.0024	Two particular opportunities occurred in 1996 .
Neuroinformatics.0025	* The first was the existence of the US/European Commission Biotechnology Task force co-chaired by Mary Clutter from NSF .
Neuroinformatics.0026	Within the mandate of this committee , of which Koslow was a member the United States European Commission Committee on Neuroinformatics was established and co-chaired by Koslow from the United States .
Neuroinformatics.0027	This committee resulted in the European Commission initiating support for neuroinformatics in Framework 5 and it has continued to support activities in neuroinformatics research and training .
Neuroinformatics.0028	* A second opportunity for globalization of neuroinformatics occurred when the participating governments of the Mega Science Forum -LRB- MSF -RRB- of the OECD were asked if they had any new scientific initiatives to bring forward for scientific cooperation around the globe .
Neuroinformatics.0029	The White House Office on Science and Technology Policy requested that agencies in the federal government meet at NIH to decide if cooperation were needed that would be of global benefit .
Neuroinformatics.0030	The NIH held a series of meetings in which proposals from different agencies were discussed .
Neuroinformatics.0031	The proposal recommendation from the U.S. for the MSF was a combination of the NSF and NIH proposals .
Neuroinformatics.0032	Jim Edwards of NSF supported databases and data-sharing in the area of biodiversity ; Koslow proposed the HPG as a model for sharing neuroscientific data , with the new moniker of neuroinformatics .
Neuroinformatics.0033	The two related initiates were combined to form the United States proposal on `` Biological Informatics '' .
Neuroinformatics.0034	This initiative was supported by the White House Office on Science and Technology Policy and presented at the OECD MSF by Edwards and Koslow .
Neuroinformatics.0035	An MSF committee was established on Biological Informatics with two subcommittees : 1 .
Neuroinformatics.0036	Biodiversity -LRB- Chair , James Edwards , NSF -RRB- , and 2 .
Neuroinformatics.0037	Neuroinformatics -LRB- Chair , Stephen Koslow , NIH -RRB- .
Neuroinformatics.0038	At the end of two years the Neuroinformatics subcommittee of the Biological Working Group issued a report supporting a global neuroinformatics effort .
Neuroinformatics.0039	Koslow , working with the NIH and the White House Office on Science and Technology Policy to establishing a new Neuroinformatics working group to develop specific recommendation to support the more general recommendations of the first report .
Neuroinformatics.0040	The Global Science Forum -LRB- GSF ; renamed from MSF -RRB- of the OECD supported this recommendation .
Neuroinformatics.0041	The International Neuroinformatics Coordinating Facility This committee presented 3 recommendations to the member governments of GSF .
Neuroinformatics.0042	These recommendations were : # National neuroinformatics programs should be continued or initiated in each country should have a national node to both provide research resources nationally and to serve as the contact for national and international coordination .
Neuroinformatics.0043	# An International Neuroinformatics Coordinating Facility -LRB- INCF -RRB- should be established .
Neuroinformatics.0044	The INCF will coordinate the implementation of a global neuroinformatics network through integration of national neuroinformatics nodes .
Neuroinformatics.0045	# A new international funding scheme should be established .
Neuroinformatics.0046	This scheme should eliminate national and disciplinary barriers and provide a most efficient approach to global collaborative research and data sharing .
Neuroinformatics.0047	In this new scheme , each country will be expected to fund the participating researchers from their country .
Neuroinformatics.0048	The GSF neuroinformatics committee then developed a business plan for the operation , support and establishment of the INCF which was supported and approved by the GSF Science Ministers at its 2004 meeting .
Neuroinformatics.0049	In 2006 the INCF was created and its central office established and set into operation at the Karolinska Institute , Stockholm , Sweden under the leadership of Sten Grillner .
Neuroinformatics.0050	Sixteen countries -LRB- Australia , Canada , China , the Czech Republic , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , India , Italy , Japan , the Netherlands , Norway , Sweden , Switzerland , the United Kingdom and the United States -RRB- , and the EU Commission established the legal basis for the INCF and Programme in International Neuroinformatics -LRB- PIN -RRB- .
Neuroinformatics.0051	To date , fourteen countries -LRB- Czech Republic , Finland , France , Germany , Italy , Japan , Norway , Sweden , Switzerland , and the United States -RRB- are members of the INCF .
Neuroinformatics.0052	Membership is pending for several other countries .
Neuroinformatics.0053	The goal of the INCF is to coordinate and promote international activities in neuroinformatics .
Neuroinformatics.0054	The INCF contributes to the development and maintenance of database and computational infrastructure and support mechanisms for neuroscience applications .
Neuroinformatics.0055	The system is expected to provide access to all freely accessible human brain data and resources to the international research community .
Neuroinformatics.0056	The more general task of INCF is to provide conditions for developing convenient and flexible applications for neuroscience laboratories in order to improve our knowledge about the human brain and its disorders .
Neuroinformatics.0057	Society for Neuroscience Brain Information Group On the foundation of all of these activities , Huda Akil , the 2003 President of the Society for Neuroscience -LRB- SfN -RRB- established the Brain Information Group -LRB- BIG -RRB- to evaluate the importance of neuroinformatics to neuroscience and specifically to the SfN .
Neuroinformatics.0058	Following the report from BIG , SfN also established a neuroinformatics committee .
Neuroinformatics.0059	In 2004 , SfN announced the Neuroscience Database Gateway -LRB- NDG -RRB- as a universal resource for neuroscientists through which almost any neuroscience databases and tools may be reached .
Neuroinformatics.0060	The NDG was established with funding from NIDA , NINDS and NIMH .
Neuroinformatics.0061	The Neuroscience Database Gateway has transitioned to a new enhanced platform , the Neuroscience Information Framework .
Neuroinformatics.0062	Funded by the NIH Neuroscience BLueprint , the NIF is a dynamic portal providing access to neuroscience-relevant resources -LRB- data , tools , materials -RRB- from a single search interface .
Neuroinformatics.0063	The NIF builds upon the foundation of the NDG , but provides a unique set of tools tailored especially for neuroscientists : a more expansive catalog , the ability to search multiple databases directly from the NIF home page , a custom web index of neuroscience resources , and a neuroscience-focused literature search function .
Neuroinformatics.0064	Collaboration with other disciplines Neuroinformatics is formed at the intersections of the following fields : * neuroscience * computer science * biology * experimental psychology * medicine * engineering * physical sciences * mathematics * chemistry Biology is concerned with molecular data -LRB- from genes to cell specific expression -RRB- ; medicine and anatomy with the structure of synapses and systems level anatomy ; engineering -- electrophysiology -LRB- from single channels to scalp surface EEG -RRB- , brain imaging ; computer science -- databases , software tools , mathematical sciences -- models , chemistry -- neurotransmitters , etc. .
Neuroinformatics.0065	Neuroscience uses all aforementioned experimental and theoretical studies to learn about the brain through its various levels .
Neuroinformatics.0066	Medical and biological specialists help to identify the unique cell types , and their elements and anatomical connections .
Neuroinformatics.0067	Functions of complex organic molecules and structures , including a myriad of biochemical , molecular , and genetic mechanisms which regulate and control brain function , are determined by specialists in chemistry and cell biology .
Neuroinformatics.0068	Brain imaging determines structural and functional information during mental and behavioral activity .
Neuroinformatics.0069	Specialists in biophysics and physiology study physical processes within neural cells neuronal networks .
Neuroinformatics.0070	The data from these fields of research is analyzed and arranged in databases and neural models in order to integrate various elements into a sophisticated system ; this is the point where neuroinformatics meets other disciplines .
Neuroinformatics.0071	Neuroscience provides the following types of data and information on which neuroinformatics operates : * Molecular and cellular data -LRB- ion channel , action potential , genetics , cytology of neurons , protein pathways -RRB- , * Data from organs and systems -LRB- visual cortex , perception , audition , sensory system , pain , taste , motor system , spinal cord -RRB- , * Cognitive data -LRB- language , emotion , motor learning , sexual behavior , decision making , social neuroscience -RRB- , * Developmental information -LRB- neuronal differentiation , cell survival , synaptic formation , motor differentiation , injury and regeneration , axon guidance , growth factors -RRB- , * Information about diseases and aging -LRB- autonomic nervous system , depression , anxiety , Parkinson 's disease , addiction , memory loss -RRB- , * Neural engineering data -LRB- brain-computer interface -RRB- , and * Computational neuroscience data -LRB- computational models of various neuronal systems , from membrane currents , proteins to learning and memory -RRB- .
Neuroinformatics.0072	Neuroinformatics uses databases , the Internet , and visualization in the storage and analysis of the mentioned neuroscience data .
Neuroinformatics.0073	Research achievements Several animal brains have been mapped and at least partly simulated .
Neuroinformatics.0074	Simulation of C. elegans roundworm neural system The connectivity of the neural circuit for touch sensitivity of the simple C. elegans nematode -LRB- roundworm -RRB- was mapped in 1985 , and partly simulated in 1993 .
Neuroinformatics.0075	Several software simulation models of the complete neural and muscular system , and to some extent the worm 's physical environment , have been presented since 2004 , and are in some cases available for downloading .
Neuroinformatics.0076	However , we still lack understanding of how the neurons and the connections between them generate the surprisingly complex range of behaviors that are observed in this relatively simple organism .
Neuroinformatics.0077	Simulation of Drosophila fruit fly neural system The brain belonging to the fruit fly Drosophila is also thoroughly studied , and a simplified model simulated .
Neuroinformatics.0078	Mouse brain mapping and simulation Between 1995 and 2005 , Henry Markram mapped the types of neurons and their connections in such a column .
Neuroinformatics.0079	The Blue Brain project , completed in December 2006 , aimed at the simulation of a rat neocortical column , which can be considered the smallest functional unit of the neocortex -LRB- the part of the brain thought to be responsible for higher functions such as conscious thought -RRB- , containing 10,000 neurons -LRB- and 108synapses -RRB- .
Neuroinformatics.0080	In November 2007 , the project reported the end of the first phase , delivering a data-driven process for creating , validating , and researching the neocortical column .
Neuroinformatics.0081	An artificial neural network described as being `` as big and as complex as half of a mouse brain '' was run on an IBM blue gene supercomputer by a University of Nevada research team in 2007 .
Neuroinformatics.0082	A simulated time of one second took ten seconds of computer time .
Neuroinformatics.0083	The researchers said they had seen `` biologically consistent '' nerve impulses flowed through the virtual cortex .
Neuroinformatics.0084	However , the simulation lacked the structures seen in real mice brains , and they intend to improve the accuracy of the neuron model .
Neuroinformatics.0085	Research programs and groups Neuroscience Information Framework The Neuroscience Information Framework -LRB- NIF -RRB- is an initiative of the NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research , which was established in 2004 by the National Institutes of Health .
Neuroinformatics.0086	Unlike general search engines , NIF provides deeper access to a more focused set of resources that are relevant to neuroscience , search strategies tailored to neuroscience , and access to content that is traditionally `` hidden '' from web search engines .
Neuroinformatics.0087	The NIF is a dynamic inventory of neuroscience databases , annotated and integrated with a unified system of biomedical terminology -RSB- -LRB- i.e. NeuroLex -RRB- .
Neuroinformatics.0088	NIF supports concept-based queries across multiple scales of biological structure and multiple levels of biological function , making it easier to search for and understand the results .
Neuroinformatics.0089	NIF will also provide a registry through which resources providers can disclose availability of resources relevant to neuroscience research .
Neuroinformatics.0090	NIF is not intended to be a warehouse or repository itself , but a means for disclosing and locating resources elsewhere available via the web .
Neuroinformatics.0091	Genes to Cognition A neuroscience research programme that studies genes , the brain and behaviour in an integrated manner .
Neuroinformatics.0092	It is engaged in a large-scale investigation of the function of molecules found at the synapse .
Neuroinformatics.0093	This is mainly focused on proteins that interact with the NMDA receptor , a receptor for the neurotransmitter , glutamate , which is required for processes of synaptic plasticity such as long-term potentiation -LRB- LTP -RRB- .
Neuroinformatics.0094	Many of the techniques used are high-throughput in nature , and integrating the various data sources , along with guiding the experiments has raised numerous informatics questions .
Neuroinformatics.0095	The program is primarily run by Professor Seth Grant at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute , but there are many other teams of collaborators across the world .
Neuroinformatics.0096	Neurogenetics : GeneNetwork Genenetwork started as component of the NIH Human Brain Project in 1999 with a focus on the genetic analysis of brain structure and function .
Neuroinformatics.0097	This international program consists of tightly integrated genome and phenome data sets for human , mouse , and rat that are designed specifically for large-scale systems and network studies relating gene variants to differences in mRNA and protein expression and to differences in CNS structure and behavior .
Neuroinformatics.0098	The great majority of data are open access .
Neuroinformatics.0099	GeneNetwork has a companion neuroimaging web site -- the Mouse Brain Library -- that contains high resolution images for thousands of genetically defined strains of mice .
Neuroinformatics.0100	The Blue Brain Project The Blue Brain Project was founded in May 2005 , and uses an 8000 processor Blue Gene/L supercomputer developed by IBM .
Neuroinformatics.0101	At the time , this was one of the fastest supercomputers in the world .
Neuroinformatics.0102	The project involves : * Databases : 3D reconstructed model neurons , synapses , synaptic pathways , microcircuit statistics , computer model neurons , virtual neurons .
Neuroinformatics.0103	* Visualization : microcircuit builder and simulation results visualizator , 2D , 3D and immersive visualization systems are being developed .
Neuroinformatics.0104	* Simulation : a simulation environment for large scale simulations of morphologically complex neurons on 8000 processors of IBM 's Blue Gene supercomputer .
Neuroinformatics.0105	* Simulations and experiments : iterations between large scale simulations of neocortical microcircuits and experiments in order to verify the computational model and explore predictions .
Neuroinformatics.0106	The mission of the Blue Brain Project is to understand mammalian brain function and dysfunction through detailed simulations .
Neuroinformatics.0107	The Blue Brain Project will invite researchers to build their own models of different brain regions in different species and at different levels of detail using Blue Brain Software for simulation on Blue Gene .
Neuroinformatics.0108	These models will be deposited in an internet database from which Blue Brain software can extract and connect models together to build brain regions and begin the first whole brain simulations .
Neuroinformatics.0109	The Neuroinformatics Portal Pilot The project is part of a larger effort to enhance the exchange of neuroscience data , data-analysis tools , and modeling software .
Neuroinformatics.0110	The portal is supported from many members of the OECD Working Group on Neuroinformatics .
Neuroinformatics.0111	The Portal Pilot is promoted by the German Ministry for Science and Education .
Neuroinformatics.0112	The Neuronal Time Series Analysis -LRB- NTSA -RRB- NTSA Workbench is a set of tools , techniques and standards designed to meet the needs of neuroscientists who work with neuronal time series data .
Neuroinformatics.0113	The goal of this project is to develop information system that will make the storage , organization , retrieval , analysis and sharing of experimental and simulated neuronal data easier .
Neuroinformatics.0114	The ultimate aim is to develop a set of tools , techniques and standards in order to satisfy the needs of neuroscientists who work with neuronal data .
Neuroinformatics.0115	Japan national neuroinformatics resource The Visiome Platform is the Neuroinformatics Search Service that provides access to mathematical models , experimental data , analysis libraries and related resources .
Neuroinformatics.0116	An online portal for neurophysiological data sharing is also available at -LSB- http://brainliner.jp BrainLiner.jp -RSB- as part of the MEXT Strategic Research Program for Brain Sciences -LRB- SRPBS -RRB- .
Neuroinformatics.0117	The CARMEN project The -LSB- http://www.carmen.org.uk/ CARMEN -RSB- project is a multi-site -LRB- 11 universities in the United Kingdom -RRB- research project aimed at using GRID computing to enable experimental neuroscientists to archive their datasets in a structured database , making them widely accessible for further research , and for modellers and algorithm developers to exploit .
Neuroinformatics.0118	The Cognitive Atlas The -LSB- http://www.cognitiveatlas.org/ Cognitive Atlas -RSB- is a project developing a shared knowledge base in cognitive science and neuroscience .
Neuroinformatics.0119	This comprises two basic kinds of knowledge : tasks and concepts , providing definitions and properties thereof , and also relationships between them .
Neuroinformatics.0120	An important feature of the site is ability to cite literature for assertions -LRB- e.g. `` The Stroop task measures executive control '' -RRB- and to discuss their validity .
Neuroinformatics.0121	It contributes to NeuroLex and the Neuroscience Information Framework , allows programmatic access to the database , and is built around semantic web technologies .
Neuroinformatics.0122	Research groups * The Institute of Neuroinformatics -LRB- INI -RRB- was established at the University of Zurich at the end of 1995 .
Neuroinformatics.0123	The mission of the Institute is to discover the key principles by which brains work and to implement these in artificial systems that interact intelligently with the real world .
Neuroinformatics.0124	* The THOR Center for Neuroinformatics was established April 1998 at the Department of Mathematical Modelling , Technical University of Denmark .
Neuroinformatics.0125	Besides pursuing independent research goals , the THOR Center hosts a number of related projects concerning neural networks , functional neuroimaging , multimedia signal processing , and biomedical signal processing .
Neuroinformatics.0126	* Netherlands state program in neuroinformatics started in the light of the international OECD Global Science Forum which aim is to create a worldwide program in Neuroinformatics .
Neuroinformatics.0127	* Shun-ichi Amari , Laboratory for Mathematical Neuroscience , RIKEN Brain Science Institute Wako , Saitama , Japan .
Neuroinformatics.0128	The target of Laboratory for Mathematical Neuroscience is to establish mathematical foundations of brain-style computations toward construction of a new type of information science .
Neuroinformatics.0129	* Gary Egan , Neuroimaging & Neuroinformatics , Howard Florey Institute , University of Melbourne , Melbourne , Australia .
Neuroinformatics.0130	Institute scientists utilize brain imaging techniques , such as magnetic resonance imaging , to reveal the organization of brain networks involved in human thought .
Neuroinformatics.0131	* Andreas VM Herz Computational Neuroscience , ITB , Humboldt-University Berlin , Berlin Germany .
Neuroinformatics.0132	This group focuses on computational neurobiology , in particular on the dynamics and signal processing capabilities of systems with spiking neurons .
Neuroinformatics.0133	* Nicolas Le Novère , EBI Computational Neurobiology , EMBL-EBI Hinxton , United Kingdom .
Neuroinformatics.0134	The main goal of the group is to build realistic models of neuronal function at various levels , from the synapse to the micro-circuit , based on the precise knowledge of molecule functions and interactions -LRB- Systems Biology -RRB- * The Neuroinformatics Group in Bielefeld has been active in the field of Artificial Neural Networks since 1989 .
Neuroinformatics.0135	Current research programmes within the group are focused on the improvement of man-machine-interfaces , robot-force-control , eye-tracking experiments , machine vision , virtual reality and distributed systems .
Neuroinformatics.0136	Books in the field * Computing the Brain : A Guide to Neuroinformatics by Michael A. Arbib and Jeffrey S. Grethe -LRB- 2001 -RRB- , * Electronic Collaboration in Science -LRB- Progress in Neuroinformatics Research Series -RRB- by Stephen H. Koslow and Michael F. Huerta -LRB- 2000 -RRB- , * Databasing the Brain : From Data to Knowledge -LRB- Neuroinformatics -RRB- by Steven H. Koslow and Shankar Subramaniam , -LRB- 2005 -RRB- , * Neuroinformatics : An Overview of the Human Brain Project -LRB- Progress in Neuroinformatics Research Series -RRB- by Stephen H. Koslow and Michael F. Huerta -LRB- 1997 -RRB- , * Neuroscience Databases : A Practical Guide by Rolf Kötter -LRB- 2002 -RRB- , * Brain Mapping : The Methods , Second Edition by Arthur W. Toga and John C. Mazziott -LRB- 2002 -RRB- , * Biomedical Informatics : Computer Applications in Health Care and Biomedicine -LRB- Health Informatics -RRB- by James J. Cimino and Edward H. Shortliffe .
Neuroinformatics.0137	-LRB- 2006 -RRB- , * Computational Neuroanatomy : Principles and Methods edited by Giorgio Ascoli -LRB- 2002 -RRB- , * Observed Brain Dynamics by Partha P. Mitra and Hemant Bokil -LRB- 2007 -RRB- , * Principles of Computational Modelling in Neuroscience by David Steratt et al. -LRB- 2011 -RRB- Journals in the field * -LSB- http://frontiersin.org/neuroinformatics Frontiers in Neuroinformatics -RSB- open-access journal receiving submissions from all areas of neuroinformatics , * -LSB- http://www.springerlink.com/content/120559/ Neuroinformatics -RSB- The aim of this journal is to encourage , facilitate , and disseminate the use of software tools and databases in the neuroscience community to discover the key principles by which brains work * -LSB- http://www.springerlink.com/content/100282/ Journal of Computational Neuroscience -RSB- * -LSB- http://www.ploscompbiol.org PLoS Computational Biology -RSB- * -LSB- http://www.springerlink.com/content/100465/ Biological Cybernetics -RSB- * -LSB- http://www.mitpressjournals.org/loi/neco Neural Computation -RSB- * `` -LSB- http://ees.elsevier.com/jws/ Journal on Web Semantics -RSB- '' .
Neuroinformatics.0138	Theory and Applications , Artificial Intelligence , * `` Journal of Integrative Neuroscience '' .
Neuroinformatics.0139	Journal of Neuroscience , * `` Neural Information Processing '' .
Neuroinformatics.0140	Letters and Review Neuroscience , Computational , Neuroinformatics , Theory and Applications , * `` Interdisciplinary Description of Complex Systems '' .
Neuroinformatics.0141	General science , * Neuron .
Neuroinformatics.0142	General Neuroscience , Cellular Neuroscience , * Science .
Neuroinformatics.0143	General Science Technologies and developments The main technological tendencies in neuroinformatics are : # Application of computer science for building databases , tools , and networks in neuroscience ; # Analysis and modeling of neuronal systems .
Neuroinformatics.0144	In order to organize and operate with neural data scientists need to use the standard terminology and atlases that precisely describe the brain structures and their relationships .
Neuroinformatics.0145	BrainML is a system that provides a standard XML metaformat for exchanging neuroscience data .
Neuroinformatics.0146	Grid computing is an emerging computing model that provides the ability to perform higher productivity and speed in computing by using connection of many networked computers to model a virtual computer architecture that is able to distribute process execution across a parallel infrastructure .
Neuroinformatics.0147	Grids use the resources of many separate computers connected by a network -LRB- usually the Internet -RRB- to solve large-scale computation problems .
Neuroinformatics.0148	Grids provide the ability to perform computations on large data sets , by breaking them down into many smaller ones , or provide the ability to perform many more computations at once than would be possible on a single computer .
Neuroinformatics.0149	Grid network systems are very important in the neuroscience research because of temporary nature of the neuroscience 's web-sources ; it 's common for such data to disappear due to maintain problems of the websites .
Neuroinformatics.0150	Storage Resource Broker one of the most advanced grid systems can offer the obvious advantages for neuronal research .
Neuroinformatics.0151	The Biomedical Informatics Research Network -LRB- BIRN -RRB- is a good example of the advance grid system for neuroscience .
Neuroinformatics.0152	BIRN is a geographically distributed virtual community of shared resources offering vast scope of services to advance the diagnosis and treatment of disease .
Neuroinformatics.0153	The BIRN enhance the communication and collaboration between research disciplines , such as biomedical and clinical by providing necessary tools and technologies for biomedical community .
Neuroinformatics.0154	BIRN allow combining databases , interfaces and tools into a single environment .
Neuroinformatics.0155	The data exchange between cells and structures of the bran are very complicated and interconnected process .
Neuroinformatics.0156	The expressed genes and changes in their expressions are good tools for determining current state of the brain and for evaluating its function .
Neuroinformatics.0157	The gene expression analysis helps to find out the reasons of brain disease rising from genes .
Neuroinformatics.0158	GeneWays system concerned with cellular morphology and circuits .
Neuroinformatics.0159	GeneWays is a system for automatically extracting , analyzing , visualizing and integrating molecular pathway data from the research literature .
Neuroinformatics.0160	The system focuses on interactions between molecular substances and actions , providing a graphical view on the collected information and allows researchers to review and correct the integrated information .
Neuroinformatics.0161	Mathematical modeling is very important for neuroinformatics such as models on cellular and neuronal levels .
Neuroinformatics.0162	Neocortical Microcircuit Database -LRB- NMDB -RRB- .
Neuroinformatics.0163	A profound database of versatile brain 's data from cells to complex structures .
Neuroinformatics.0164	Researchers are able not only to add data to the database but also to acquire and edit one .
Neuroinformatics.0165	SenseLab -- a collection of multilevel neuronal databases and tools .
Neuroinformatics.0166	SenseLab contains six related databases that support experimental and theoretical research on the membrane properties that mediate information processing in nerve cells , using the olfactory pathway as a model system .
Neuroinformatics.0167	Detailed imaging of brain structure and function is provided by the web-based high-resolution anatomical brain atlases .
Neuroinformatics.0168	One of the examples is a BrainMaps.org .
Neuroinformatics.0169	BrainMaps.org is an interactive high-resolution digital brain atlas using a high-speed database and virtual microscope that is based on over 12 million megapixels of scanned images of several species , including human .
Neuroinformatics.0170	Another approach in the area of the brain mappings is the probabilistic atlases obtained from the real data from different group of people , formed by specific factors , like age , gender , diseased etc. .
Neuroinformatics.0171	Provides more flexible tools for brain research and allow obtaining more reliable and precise results , which can not be achieved with the help of traditional brain atlases .
Nutrition.0000	bytes = `` 110837 '' > Nutrition -LRB- also called nourishment or aliment -RRB- is the provision , to cells and organisms , of the materials necessary -LRB- in the form of food -RRB- to support life .
Nutrition.0001	Many common health problems can be prevented or alleviated with a healthy diet .
Nutrition.0002	The diet of an organism is what it eats , which is largely determined by the perceived palatability of foods .
Nutrition.0003	Dietitians are health professionals who specialize in human nutrition , meal planning , economics , and preparation .
Nutrition.0004	They are trained to provide safe , evidence-based dietary advice and management to individuals -LRB- in health and disease -RRB- , as well as to institutions .
Nutrition.0005	Clinical nutritionists are health professionals who focus more specifically on the role of nutrition in chronic disease , including possible prevention or remediation by addressing nutritional deficiencies before resorting to drugs .
Nutrition.0006	While government regulation of the use of this professional title is less universal than for `` dietician '' , the field is supported by many high-level academic programs , up to and including the Doctoral level , and has its own voluntary certification board , professional associations , and peer-reviewed journals , e.g. the American Society for Nutrition , Nutrition Society of India , Food Scientists and Nutritionists Association India , Indian Dietetic Association and the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition .
Nutrition.0007	A poor diet may have an injurious impact on health , causing deficiency diseases such as scurvy and kwashiorkor ; health-threatening conditions like obesity and metabolic syndrome ; and such common chronic systemic diseases as cardiovascular disease , diabetes , and osteoporosis .
Nutrition.0008	Animal nutrition Overview Nutritional science investigates the metabolic and physiological responses of the body to diet .
Nutrition.0009	With advances in the fields of molecular biology , biochemistry , nutritional immunology , molecular medicine and genetics , the study of nutrition is increasingly concerned with metabolism and metabolic pathways : the sequences of biochemical steps through which substances in living things change from one form to another .
Nutrition.0010	Carnivore and herbivore diets are contrasting , with basic nitrogen and carbon proportions being at varying levels in particular foods .
Nutrition.0011	Carnivores consume more nitrogen than carbon while herbivores consume less nitrogen than carbon , when an equal quantity is measured .
Nutrition.0012	The human body contains chemical compounds , such as water , carbohydrates -LRB- sugar , starch , and fiber -RRB- , amino acids -LRB- in proteins -RRB- , fatty acids -LRB- in lipids -RRB- , and nucleic acids -LRB- DNA and RNA -RRB- .
Nutrition.0013	These compounds in turn consist of elements such as carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , phosphorus , calcium , iron , zinc , magnesium , manganese , and so on .
Nutrition.0014	All of these chemical compounds and elements occur in various forms and combinations -LRB- e.g. hormones , vitamins , phospholipids , hydroxyapatite -RRB- , both in the human body and in the plant and animal organisms that humans eat .
Nutrition.0015	The human body consists of elements and compounds ingested , digested , absorbed , and circulated through the bloodstream to feed the cells of the body .
Nutrition.0016	Except in the unborn fetus , the digestive system is the first system involved .
Nutrition.0017	In a typical adult , about seven liters of digestive juices enter the digestive tract .
Nutrition.0018	These digestive juices break chemical bonds in ingested molecules , and modify their conformations and energy states .
Nutrition.0019	Though some molecules are absorbed into the bloodstream unchanged , digestive processes release them from the matrix of foods .
Nutrition.0020	Unabsorbed matter , along with some waste products of metabolism , is eliminated from the body in the feces .
Nutrition.0021	Studies of nutritional status must take into account the state of the body before and after experiments , as well as the chemical composition of the whole diet and of all material excreted and eliminated from the body -LRB- in urine and feces -RRB- .
Nutrition.0022	Comparing the food to the waste can help determine the specific compounds and elements absorbed and metabolized in the body .
Nutrition.0023	The effects of nutrients may only be discernible over an extended period , during which all food and waste must be analyzed .
Nutrition.0024	The number of variables involved in such experiments is high , making nutritional studies time-consuming and expensive , which explains why the science of human nutrition is still slowly evolving .
Nutrition.0025	In general , eating a wide variety of fresh , whole -LRB- unprocessed -RRB- , foods has proven favorable for one 's health compared to monotonous diets based on processed foods .
Nutrition.0026	In particular , the consumption of whole-plant foods slows digestion and allows better absorption , and a more favorable balance of essential nutrients per Calorie , resulting in better management of cell growth , maintenance , and mitosis -LRB- cell division -RRB- , as well as better regulation of appetite and blood sugar .
Nutrition.0027	Regularly scheduled meals -LRB- every few hours -RRB- have also proven more wholesome than infrequent or haphazard ones , although a recent study has also linked more frequent meals with a higher risk of colon cancer in men .
Nutrition.0028	Nutrients There are six major classes of nutrients : carbohydrates , fats , minerals , protein , vitamins , and water .
Nutrition.0029	These nutrient classes can be categorized as either macronutrients -LRB- needed in relatively large amounts -RRB- or micronutrients -LRB- needed in smaller quantities -RRB- .
Nutrition.0030	The macronutrients include carbohydrates -LRB- including fiber -RRB- , fats , protein , and water .
Nutrition.0031	The micronutrients are minerals and vitamins .
Nutrition.0032	The macronutrients -LRB- excluding fiber and water -RRB- provide structural material -LRB- amino acids from which proteins are built , and lipids from which cell membranes and some signaling molecules are built -RRB- and energy .
Nutrition.0033	Some of the structural material can be used to generate energy internally , and in either case it is measured in Joules or kilocalories -LRB- often called `` Calories '' and written with a capital C to distinguish them from little ` c ' calories -RRB- .
Nutrition.0034	Carbohydrates and proteins provide 17 kJ approximately -LRB- 4 kcal -RRB- of energy per gram , while fats provide 37 kJ -LRB- 9 kcal -RRB- per gram. , though the net energy from either depends on such factors as absorption and digestive effort , which vary substantially from instance to instance .
Nutrition.0035	Vitamins , minerals , fiber , and water do not provide energy , but are required for other reasons .
Nutrition.0036	A third class of dietary material , fiber -LRB- i.e. , non-digestible material such as cellulose -RRB- , is also required , for both mechanical and biochemical reasons , although the exact reasons remain unclear .
Nutrition.0037	Molecules of carbohydrates and fats consist of carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen atoms .
Nutrition.0038	Carbohydrates range from simple monosaccharides -LRB- glucose , fructose , galactose -RRB- to complex polysaccharides -LRB- starch -RRB- .
Nutrition.0039	Fats are triglycerides , made of assorted fatty acid monomers bound to a glycerol backbone .
Nutrition.0040	Some fatty acids , but not all , are essential in the diet : they can not be synthesized in the body .
Nutrition.0041	Protein molecules contain nitrogen atoms in addition to carbon , oxygen , and hydrogen .
Nutrition.0042	The fundamental components of protein are nitrogen-containing amino acids , some of which are essential in the sense that humans can not make them internally .
Nutrition.0043	Some of the amino acids are convertible -LRB- with the expenditure of energy -RRB- to glucose and can be used for energy production , just as ordinary glucose , in a process known as gluconeogenesis .
Nutrition.0044	By breaking down existing protein , some glucose can be produced internally ; the remaining amino acids are discarded , primarily as urea in urine .
Nutrition.0045	This occurs normally only during prolonged starvation .
Nutrition.0046	Other micronutrients include antioxidants and phytochemicals , which are said to influence -LRB- or protect -RRB- some body systems .
Nutrition.0047	Their necessity is not as well established as in the case of , for instance , vitamins .
Nutrition.0048	Most foods contain a mix of some or all of the nutrient classes , together with other substances , such as toxins of various sorts .
Nutrition.0049	Some nutrients can be stored internally -LRB- e.g. , the fat soluble vitamins -RRB- , while others are required more or less continuously .
Nutrition.0050	Poor health can be caused by a lack of required nutrients or , in extreme cases , too much of a required nutrient .
Nutrition.0051	For example , both salt and water -LRB- both absolutely required -RRB- will cause illness or even death in excessive amounts .
Nutrition.0052	Carbohydrates Carbohydrates may be classified as monosaccharides , disaccharides , or polysaccharides depending on the number of monomer -LRB- sugar -RRB- units they contain .
Nutrition.0053	They constitute a large part of foods such as rice , noodles , bread , and other grain-based products .
Nutrition.0054	Monosaccharides , disaccharides , and polysaccharides contain one , two , and three or more sugar units , respectively .
Nutrition.0055	Polysaccharides are often referred to as complex carbohydrates because they are typically long , multiple branched chains of sugar units .
Nutrition.0056	Traditionally , simple carbohydrates were believed to be absorbed quickly , and therefore to raise blood-glucose levels more rapidly than complex carbohydrates .
Nutrition.0057	This , however , is not accurate .
Nutrition.0058	Some simple carbohydrates -LRB- e.g. fructose -RRB- follow different metabolic pathways -LRB- e.g. fructolysis -RRB- which result in only a partial catabolism to glucose , while many complex carbohydrates may be digested at essentially the same rate as simple carbohydrates .
Nutrition.0059	Glucose stimulates the production of insulin through food entering the bloodstream , which is grasped by the beta cells in the pancreas .
Nutrition.0060	Fiber Dietary fiber is a carbohydrate -LRB- or a polysaccharide -RRB- that is incompletely absorbed in humans and in some animals .
Nutrition.0061	Like all carbohydrates , when it is metabolized it can produce four Calories -LRB- kilocalories -RRB- of energy per gram .
Nutrition.0062	However , in most circumstances it accounts for less than that because of its limited absorption and digestibility .
Nutrition.0063	Dietary fiber consists mainly of cellulose , a large carbohydrate polymer that is indigestible because humans do not have the required enzymes to disassemble it .
Nutrition.0064	There are two subcategories : soluble and insoluble fiber .
Nutrition.0065	Whole grains , fruits -LRB- especially plums , prunes , and figs -RRB- , and vegetables are good sources of dietary fiber .
Nutrition.0066	There are many health benefits of a high-fiber diet .
Nutrition.0067	Dietary fiber helps reduce the chance of gastrointestinal problems such as constipation and diarrhea by increasing the weight and size of stool and softening it .
Nutrition.0068	Insoluble fiber , found in whole wheat flour , nuts and vegetables , especially stimulates peristalsis -- the rhythmic muscular contractions of the intestines which move digesta along the digestive tract .
Nutrition.0069	Soluble fiber , found in oats , peas , beans , and many fruits , dissolves in water in the intestinal tract to produce a gel which slows the movement of food through the intestines .
Nutrition.0070	This may help lower blood glucose levels because it can slow the absorption of sugar .
Nutrition.0071	Additionally , fiber , perhaps especially that from whole grains , is thought to possibly help lessen insulin spikes , and therefore reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes .
Nutrition.0072	The link between increased fiber consumption and a decreased risk of colorectal cancer is still uncertain .
Nutrition.0073	Fat A molecule of dietary fat typically consists of several fatty acids -LRB- containing long chains of carbon and hydrogen atoms -RRB- , bonded to a glycerol .
Nutrition.0074	They are typically found as triglycerides -LRB- three fatty acids attached to one glycerol backbone -RRB- .
Nutrition.0075	Fats may be classified as saturated or unsaturated depending on the detailed structure of the fatty acids involved .
Nutrition.0076	Saturated fats have all of the carbon atoms in their fatty acid chains bonded to hydrogen atoms , whereas unsaturated fats have some of these carbon atoms double-bonded , so their molecules have relatively fewer hydrogen atoms than a saturated fatty acid of the same length .
Nutrition.0077	Unsaturated fats may be further classified as monounsaturated -LRB- one double-bond -RRB- or polyunsaturated -LRB- many double-bonds -RRB- .
Nutrition.0078	Furthermore , depending on the location of the double-bond in the fatty acid chain , unsaturated fatty acids are classified as omega-3 or omega-6 fatty acids .
Nutrition.0079	Trans fats are a type of unsaturated fat with trans-isomer bonds ; these are rare in nature and in foods from natural sources ; they are typically created in an industrial process called -LRB- partial -RRB- hydrogenation .
Nutrition.0080	There are nine kilocalories in each gram of fat .
Nutrition.0081	Fatty acids such as conjugated linoleic acid , catalpic acid , eleostearic acid and punicic acid , in addition to providing energy , represent potent immune modulatory molecules .
Nutrition.0082	Saturated fats -LRB- typically from animal sources -RRB- have been a staple in many world cultures for millennia .
Nutrition.0083	Unsaturated fats -LRB- e. g. , vegetable oil -RRB- are considered healthier , while trans fats are to be avoided .
Nutrition.0084	Saturated and some trans fats are typically solid at room temperature -LRB- such as butter or lard -RRB- , while unsaturated fats are typically liquids -LRB- such as olive oil or flaxseed oil -RRB- .
Nutrition.0085	Trans fats are very rare in nature , and have been shown to be highly detrimental to human health , but have properties useful in the food processing industry , such as rancidity resistance .
Nutrition.0086	Essential fatty acids Most fatty acids are non-essential , meaning the body can produce them as needed , generally from other fatty acids and always by expending energy to do so .
Nutrition.0087	However , in humans , at least two fatty acids are essential and must be included in the diet .
Nutrition.0088	An appropriate balance of essential fatty acids -- omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids -- seems also important for health , although definitive experimental demonstration has been elusive .
Nutrition.0089	Both of these `` omega '' long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids are substrates for a class of eicosanoids known as prostaglandins , which have roles throughout the human body .
Nutrition.0090	They are hormones , in some respects .
Nutrition.0091	The omega-3 eicosapentaenoic acid -LRB- EPA -RRB- , which can be made in the human body from the omega-3 essential fatty acid alpha-linolenic acid -LRB- ALA -RRB- , or taken in through marine food sources , serves as a building block for series 3 prostaglandins -LRB- e.g. weakly inflammatory PGE3 -RRB- .
Nutrition.0092	The omega-6 dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid -LRB- DGLA -RRB- serves as a building block for series 1 prostaglandins -LRB- e.g. anti-inflammatory PGE1 -RRB- , whereas arachidonic acid -LRB- AA -RRB- serves as a building block for series 2 prostaglandins -LRB- e.g. pro-inflammatory PGE 2 -RRB- .
Nutrition.0093	Both DGLA and AA can be made from the omega-6 linoleic acid -LRB- LA -RRB- in the human body , or can be taken in directly through food .
Nutrition.0094	An appropriately balanced intake of omega-3 and omega-6 partly determines the relative production of different prostaglandins , which is one reason why a balance between omega-3 and omega-6 is believed important for cardiovascular health .
Nutrition.0095	In industrialized societies , people typically consume large amounts of processed vegetable oils , which have reduced amounts of the essential fatty acids along with too much of omega-6 fatty acids relative to omega-3 fatty acids .
Nutrition.0096	The conversion rate of omega-6 DGLA to AA largely determines the production of the prostaglandins PGE1 and PGE2 .
Nutrition.0097	Omega-3 EPA prevents AA from being released from membranes , thereby skewing prostaglandin balance away from pro-inflammatory PGE2 -LRB- made from AA -RRB- toward anti-inflammatory PGE1 -LRB- made from DGLA -RRB- .
Nutrition.0098	Moreover , the conversion -LRB- desaturation -RRB- of DGLA to AA is controlled by the enzyme delta-5-desaturase , which in turn is controlled by hormones such as insulin -LRB- up-regulation -RRB- and glucagon -LRB- down-regulation -RRB- .
Nutrition.0099	The amount and type of carbohydrates consumed , along with some types of amino acid , can influence processes involving insulin , glucagon , and other hormones ; therefore the ratio of omega-3 versus omega-6 has wide effects on general health , and specific effects on immune function and inflammation , and mitosis -LRB- i.e. cell division -RRB- .
Nutrition.0100	Protein Proteins are the basis of many animal body structures -LRB- e.g. muscles , skin , and hair -RRB- .
Nutrition.0101	They also form the enzymes that control chemical reactions throughout the body .
Nutrition.0102	Each molecule is composed of amino acids , which are characterized by inclusion of nitrogen and sometimes sulphur -LRB- these components are responsible for the distinctive smell of burning protein , such as the keratin in hair -RRB- .
Nutrition.0103	The body requires amino acids to produce new proteins -LRB- protein retention -RRB- and to replace damaged proteins -LRB- maintenance -RRB- .
Nutrition.0104	As there is no protein or amino acid storage provision , amino acids must be present in the diet .
Nutrition.0105	Excess amino acids are discarded , typically in the urine .
Nutrition.0106	For all animals , some amino acids are essential -LRB- an animal can not produce them internally -RRB- and some are non-essential -LRB- the animal can produce them from other nitrogen-containing compounds -RRB- .
Nutrition.0107	About twenty amino acids are found in the human body , and about ten of these are essential and , therefore , must be included in the diet .
Nutrition.0108	A diet that contains adequate amounts of amino acids -LRB- especially those that are essential -RRB- is particularly important in some situations : during early development and maturation , pregnancy , lactation , or injury -LRB- a burn , for instance -RRB- .
Nutrition.0109	A complete protein source contains all the essential amino acids ; an incomplete protein source lacks one or more of the essential amino acids .
Nutrition.0110	It is possible to combine two incomplete protein sources -LRB- e.g. rice and beans -RRB- to make a complete protein source , and characteristic combinations are the basis of distinct cultural cooking traditions .
Nutrition.0111	However , complementary sources of protein do n't need to be eaten at the same meal to be used together by the body .
Nutrition.0112	Sources of dietary protein include meats , tofu and other soy-products , eggs , legumes , and dairy products such as milk and cheese .
Nutrition.0113	Excess amino acids from protein can be converted into glucose and used for fuel through a process called gluconeogenesis .
Nutrition.0114	The amino acids remaining after such conversion are discarded .
Nutrition.0115	Minerals Dietary minerals are the chemical elements required by living organisms , other than the four elements carbon , hydrogen , nitrogen , and oxygen that are present in nearly all organic molecules .
Nutrition.0116	The term `` mineral '' is archaic , since the intent is to describe simply the less common elements in the diet .
Nutrition.0117	Some are heavier than the four just mentioned , including several metals , which often occur as ions in the body .
Nutrition.0118	Some dietitians recommend that these be supplied from foods in which they occur naturally , or at least as complex compounds , or sometimes even from natural inorganic sources -LRB- such as calcium carbonate from ground oyster shells -RRB- .
Nutrition.0119	Some minerals are absorbed much more readily in the ionic forms found in such sources .
Nutrition.0120	On the other hand , minerals are often artificially added to the diet as supplements ; the most famous is likely iodine in iodized salt which prevents goiter .
Nutrition.0121	Macrominerals Many elements are essential in relative quantity ; they are usually called `` bulk minerals '' .
Nutrition.0122	Some are structural , but many play a role as electrolytes .
Nutrition.0123	Elements with recommended dietary allowance -LRB- RDA -RRB- greater than 200 mg/day are , in alphabetical order -LRB- with informal or folk-medicine perspectives in parentheses -RRB- : * Calcium , a common electrolyte , but also needed structurally -LRB- for muscle and digestive system health , bone strength , some forms neutralize acidity , may help clear toxins , provides signaling ions for nerve and membrane functions -RRB- * Chlorine as chloride ions ; very common electrolyte ; see sodium , below * Magnesium , required for processing ATP and related reactions -LRB- builds bone , causes strong peristalsis , increases flexibility , increases alkalinity -RRB- * Phosphorus , required component of bones ; essential for energy processing * Potassium , a very common electrolyte -LRB- heart and nerve health -RRB- * Sodium , a very common electrolyte ; not generally found in dietary supplements , despite being needed in large quantities , because the ion is very common in food : typically as sodium chloride , or common salt .
Nutrition.0124	Excessive sodium consumption can deplete calcium and magnesium , leading to high blood pressure and osteoporosis .
Nutrition.0125	* Sulfur , for three essential amino acids and therefore many proteins -LRB- skin , hair , nails , liver , and pancreas -RRB- .
Nutrition.0126	Sulfur is not consumed alone , but in the form of sulfur-containing amino acids Trace minerals Many elements are required in trace amounts , usually because they play a catalytic role in enzymes .
Nutrition.0127	Some trace mineral elements -LRB- RDA + -RRB- into the soil through proton pumps .
Nutrition.0128	These hydrogen ions displace cations attached to negatively charged soil particles so that the cations are available for uptake by the root .
Nutrition.0129	In the leaves , stomata open to take in carbon dioxide and expel oxygen .
Nutrition.0130	The carbon dioxide molecules are used as the carbon source in photosynthesis .
Nutrition.0131	Although nitrogen is plentiful in the Earth 's atmosphere , very few plants can use this directly .
Nutrition.0132	Most plants therefore require nitrogen compounds to be present in the soil in which they grow .
Nutrition.0133	This is made possible by largely inert atmospheric nitrogen being changed in a nitrogen fixation process to biologically usable forms in the soil by bacteria .
Nutrition.0134	Plant nutrition is a difficult subject to understand completely , partially because of the variation between different plants and even between different species or individuals of a given clone .
Nutrition.0135	Elements present at low levels may cause deficiency symptoms , and toxicity is possible at levels that are too high .
Nutrition.0136	Furthermore , deficiency of one element may present as symptoms of toxicity from another element , and vice-versa .
Clarence Odbody.0000	bytes = `` 5234 '' > Clarence Odbody -LRB- born May 1654 -RRB- is a fictional character and the secondary protagonist in Frank Capra 's 1946 film It 's a Wonderful Life .
Clarence Odbody.0001	He is portrayed by Henry Travers .
Clarence Odbody.0002	In the story Odbody is the guardian angel of George Bailey in the film .
Clarence Odbody.0003	In the beginning of the story , Clarence is an Angel Second Class and is called by Joseph -LRB- supposedly St. Joseph -RRB- to perform a mission .
Clarence Odbody.0004	He is told that George is troubled and on the verge of committing suicide .
Clarence Odbody.0005	Joseph then shows a review of George 's life and the joy it has brought to him and others .
Clarence Odbody.0006	Clarence remarks that he can not see the vision clearly .
Clarence Odbody.0007	Joseph then remembers that he is an Angel Second Class and that he has n't earned his wings yet , and improves the clarity of the vision .
Clarence Odbody.0008	Joseph says that if Clarence can save George and help him see the good he has done for others , he may just earn his wings , after more than 200 years of trying .
Clarence Odbody.0009	Clarence then comes to Earth just in time to save George , who is about to jump off a bridge into the icy river below it .
Clarence Odbody.0010	Clarence jumps in first and George does the same as he swims over to Clarence , who is yelling at the top of his lungs .
Clarence Odbody.0011	The bridge operator hears the commotion , and Clarence and George later dry their wet clothes in the bridge operator 's shack .
Clarence Odbody.0012	The bridge operator looks at the two curiously as they warm them themselves after the ordeal , but mostly stares in bewilderment at Clarence , who says of his old , 18th century-style nightgown that his wife gave it to him on his last birthday , and he died in his sleep wearing it .
Clarence Odbody.0013	As Clarence dries his Tom Sawyer book , he talks about how suicide is against the law where he comes from , and how he is an AS2 , or Angel Second Class .
Clarence Odbody.0014	At that point , the bridge operator falls out of his chair and quickly walks out of the shack in disbelief .
Clarence Odbody.0015	Clarence talks to Bailey about his situation and how it is absurd for him to kill himself over $ 8,000 that his Uncle Billy had misplaced .
Clarence Odbody.0016	George asks Clarence how he knows about things like that , and Clarence reminds George that he is a guardian angel .
Clarence Odbody.0017	George replies that he keeps forgetting that .
Clarence Odbody.0018	Clarence then tells George that killing himself would n't solve any problems .
Clarence Odbody.0019	George concedes that notion , but goes on to say it would have been better if he had n't been born , and he wishes it were so .
Clarence Odbody.0020	Clarence , disagreeing at first , thinks it would be very effective to show George what it would be like if he had never existed .
Clarence Odbody.0021	Clarence walks up to George and says his wish has been granted , and with that , it stops snowing and becomes windy outside .
Clarence Odbody.0022	George soon finds out that he can hear with his left ear -LRB- as saving his brother 's life cost him his hearing in that ear -RRB- and that all his clothes are dry as if they were never soaked in the first place .
Clarence Odbody.0023	George then goes out into the windy night to fetch his car .
Clarence Odbody.0024	After finding that his car is not where he left it , he walks with Clarence to what was supposed to be Martini 's Bar , but is instead called Nick 's , as George never helped Mr. Martini become a homeowner or business owner .
Clarence Odbody.0025	When George asks how old Clarence is , he replies that he will be 293 years old next May , and eventually gets kicked out of Nick 's Bar for saying strange things , along with George , who tries to speak to his old boss Mr. Gower , only to be told that he was jailed for manslaughter and that if George knows him , he must also be a convict .
Clarence Odbody.0026	George then continues going about in this surreal world , and meets people he knew but who have miserable lives as George was never part of theirs , and Clarence remarks how people seem to influence other people 's lives in unique ways .
Clarence Odbody.0027	A terrified and frustrated George eventually returns to the same spot on the bridge where he was about to kill himself , and pleads with Clarence that he return to his world , even if scandal and imprisonment await him .
Clarence Odbody.0028	Clarence soon returns George to his proper universe , and when the people of Bedford Falls help him with the problem of the misplaced $ 8,000 , as if by magic , the Tom Sawyer book appears and has the message from Clarence : `` No man is a failure who has friends . ''
Clarence Odbody.0029	At that point a bell rings on George 's family Christmas tree , indicating that Clarence has finally gotten his wings .
It's a Wonderful Life.0000	bytes = `` 66590 '' > It 's a Wonderful Life is a 1946 American Christmas drama film produced and directed by Frank Capra , based on the short story `` The Greatest Gift '' , written by Philip Van Doren Stern in 1939 , and privately published by the author in 1945 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0001	The film is considered one of the most loved films in American cinema , and has become traditional viewing during the Christmas season , alongside popular classics such as Charles Dickens ' A Christmas Carol .
It's a Wonderful Life.0002	Released in 1946 , the film stars James Stewart as George Bailey , a man who has given up his dreams in order to help others , and whose imminent suicide on Christmas Eve brings about the intervention of his guardian angel , Clarence Odbody -LRB- Henry Travers -RRB- .
It's a Wonderful Life.0003	Clarence shows George all the lives he has touched and how different life in his community would be had he never been born .
It's a Wonderful Life.0004	Despite initially performing poorly at the box office due to high production costs and stiff competition at the time of its release , the film has come to be regarded as a classic and is a staple of Christmas television around the world .
It's a Wonderful Life.0005	Theatrically , the film 's break-even point was actually $ 6.3 million , approximately twice the production cost , a figure it never came close to achieving in its initial release .
It's a Wonderful Life.0006	An appraisal in 2006 reported : `` Although it was not the complete box office failure that today everyone believes ... it was initially a major disappointment and confirmed , at least to the studios , that Capra was no longer capable of turning out the populist features that made his films the must-see , money-making events they once were . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0007	The film was nominated for five Oscars and has been recognized by the American Film Institute as one of the 100 best American films ever made , placing number 11 on its initial 1998 greatest movie list , and would also place number one on its list of the most inspirational American films of all time .
It's a Wonderful Life.0008	Plot In Bedford Falls , New York on Christmas Eve , George Bailey is deeply troubled .
It's a Wonderful Life.0009	Prayers for his well-being from friends and family reach Heaven .
It's a Wonderful Life.0010	Clarence Odbody , Angel Second Class , is assigned to visit Earth to save George , thereby earning his wings .
It's a Wonderful Life.0011	Franklin and Joseph , the head angels , review George 's life with Clarence .
It's a Wonderful Life.0012	As a 12 year old boy , George saved the life of his younger brother Harry , who had fallen through the ice on a frozen pond , and because of his heroic action , George lost the hearing in his left ear .
It's a Wonderful Life.0013	Later , while working in the local pharmacy , George noticed that the druggist , Mr. Gower , despondent over his son 's death from influenza , had mistakenly filled a child 's prescription with poison , and saved Gower from killing the child and irrevocably ruining his own life .
It's a Wonderful Life.0014	George repeatedly sacrifices his dream to travel the world .
It's a Wonderful Life.0015	He waits for Harry to graduate from high school and replace him at the Bailey Building and Loan Association , vital to the townspeople .
It's a Wonderful Life.0016	On Harry 's graduation night , George , now 21 , discusses his future with Mary Hatch , who has long had a crush on him .
It's a Wonderful Life.0017	Later that evening , George 's absent-minded Uncle Billy interrupts them to tell George that his father has had a stroke , which proves fatal .
It's a Wonderful Life.0018	A few months later , Mr. Henry F. Potter , a slumlord and majority shareholder in the Building and Loan , tries to persuade the board of directors to stop providing home loans for the working poor .
It's a Wonderful Life.0019	George talks them into rejecting Potter 's proposal , but they agree only on condition that George run the Building and Loan .
It's a Wonderful Life.0020	Giving his college money to Harry , George delays his plans with the understanding that Harry will take over upon graduation .
It's a Wonderful Life.0021	When Harry graduates from college , he unexpectedly brings home a wife , whose father has offered Harry an excellent job .
It's a Wonderful Life.0022	Although Harry vows to decline the offer out of respect for his brother , George can not deny Harry such a fine opportunity and decides to keep full ownership of the Building and Loan , knowing that this will kill his dream to travel the world .
It's a Wonderful Life.0023	George calls on Mary , who has recently returned home from college .
It's a Wonderful Life.0024	After several arguments , they reveal their love for each other , and marry soon after .
It's a Wonderful Life.0025	As they depart for their honeymoon , they witness a run on the bank that leaves the Building and Loan in danger of collapse .
It's a Wonderful Life.0026	The couple quells the panic by using the $ 2,000 set aside for their honeymoon to satisfy the depositors ' immediate needs .
It's a Wonderful Life.0027	Mary enlists the help of George 's two best friends , Bert , a policeman , and Ernie , a cab driver , to create a faux tropical setting for a substitute honeymoon .
It's a Wonderful Life.0028	The couple embrace while Bert and Ernie sing in the background .
It's a Wonderful Life.0029	George and Mary raise four children : Pete , Janie , Tommy and Zuzu .
It's a Wonderful Life.0030	George starts Bailey Park , an affordable housing project .
It's a Wonderful Life.0031	Potter tries to hire him away , offering him a $ 20,000 salary , along with the promise of business trips to Europe , something that George always wanted to do .
It's a Wonderful Life.0032	George , initially tempted , turns Potter down after realizing that Potter intends to close down the Building and Loan and take full control of Bedford Falls .
It's a Wonderful Life.0033	When World War II erupts , George is unable to enlist , due to his bad ear .
It's a Wonderful Life.0034	Harry becomes a Navy fighter pilot and shoots down 15 enemy planes , two of which were targeting a ship full of troops in the Pacific .
It's a Wonderful Life.0035	For his bravery , Harry is awarded the Medal of Honor .
It's a Wonderful Life.0036	On Christmas Eve morning , Uncle Billy is on his way to Potter 's bank to deposit $ 8,000 of the Building and Loan 's cash funds .
It's a Wonderful Life.0037	He greets Potter -LRB- who has the newspaper reporting Harry 's heroics -RRB- and taunts him by reading the headlines aloud .
It's a Wonderful Life.0038	Potter angrily snatches the paper , but Billy inattentively allows the money to be snatched with it .
It's a Wonderful Life.0039	Potter opens the paper , notices the money and keeps it , knowing that displacement of bank money would result in bankruptcy for the Building and Loan and criminal charges for George .
It's a Wonderful Life.0040	When a frantic search turns up with nothing , and with a bank examiner due that day , George takes his anger and frustrations out on his family .
It's a Wonderful Life.0041	A desperate George appeals to Potter for a loan .
It's a Wonderful Life.0042	Potter sarcastically turns George down , and then swears out a warrant for his arrest for bank fraud .
It's a Wonderful Life.0043	George , now completely depressed , gets drunk at the bar owned by his friend , Giuseppe Martini , where he silently prays for help .
It's a Wonderful Life.0044	After crashing his car into a tree , George staggers to a bridge , intending to commit suicide , feeling he is `` worth more dead than alive '' because of a life insurance policy .
It's a Wonderful Life.0045	Before he can leap , Clarence jumps in first and pretends to be drowning .
It's a Wonderful Life.0046	After George rescues him , Clarence reveals himself to be George 's guardian angel .
It's a Wonderful Life.0047	George does not believe him , but when he bitterly wishes he had never been born , Clarence shows George what the town would have been like without him .
It's a Wonderful Life.0048	Bedford Falls , named Pottersville , is home to sleazy nightclubs , pawn shops , and amoral people .
It's a Wonderful Life.0049	Bailey Park is never built .
It's a Wonderful Life.0050	Mr. Gower was sent to prison for poisoning the child and is a despised derelict .
It's a Wonderful Life.0051	Martini does not own the bar , and is nowhere to be found .
It's a Wonderful Life.0052	George 's friend Violet Bick is a strip-dancer and gets arrested as a pickpocket .
It's a Wonderful Life.0053	Ernie is helplessly poor with his family having left him .
It's a Wonderful Life.0054	Uncle Billy has been in an insane asylum for years since he lost his brother and business .
It's a Wonderful Life.0055	Harry is dead as a result of George not being there to save him from drowning , and the servicemen he would have saved also died .
It's a Wonderful Life.0056	Ma Bailey is a bitter widow , and Mary a single spinster librarian .
It's a Wonderful Life.0057	George runs back to the bridge and begs to be allowed to live again .
It's a Wonderful Life.0058	His prayer is answered , and he runs home joyously , where the authorities are waiting to arrest him .
It's a Wonderful Life.0059	Mary , Uncle Billy , and a flood of townspeople arrive with more than enough donations to save George and the Building and Loan .
It's a Wonderful Life.0060	George 's friend Sam Wainwright sends him a $ 25,000 line of credit by telegram .
It's a Wonderful Life.0061	Harry also arrives to support his brother , and toasts George as `` The richest man in town '' .
It's a Wonderful Life.0062	George finds a copy of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer with the inscription , `` Dear George : Remember no man is a failure who has friends .
It's a Wonderful Life.0063	P.S. Thanks for the wings !
It's a Wonderful Life.0064	Love , Clarence . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0065	A bell rings , and his daughter Zuzu remembers that it means an angel has earned his wings .
It's a Wonderful Life.0066	George realizes that he truly has a wonderful life .
It's a Wonderful Life.0067	Cast * James Stewart as George Bailey * Donna Reed as Mary Hatch Bailey * Henry Travers as Clarence Odbody * Lionel Barrymore as Mr. Henry F. Potter * Thomas Mitchell as Uncle Billy Bailey * Beulah Bondi as Ma Bailey * Frank Faylen as Ernie Bishop , the cab driver * Ward Bond as Bert , the cop * Gloria Grahame as Violet Bick * H. B. Warner as Mr. Gower * Todd Karns as Harry Bailey * Samuel S. Hinds as Peter `` Pop '' Bailey * Lillian Randolph as Annie * Mary Treen as Cousin Tilly * Frank Albertson as Sam Wainwright * Virginia Patton as Ruth Dakin Bailey * Charles Williams as Cousin Eustace * Sarah Edwards as Mrs. Hatch * William Edmunds as Giuseppe Martini * Argentina Brunetti as Mrs. Martini * Bobby Anderson as Little George Bailey * Ronnie Ralph as Little Sam Wainwright * Jean Gale as Little Mary Hatch * Jeanine Ann Roose as Little Violet Bick * George Nokes as Little Harry Bailey * Danny Mummert as Little Marty Hatch * Sheldon Leonard as Nick , the bartender * Frank Hagney as Potter 's mute aide * Charles Lane as Potter 's rent collector * Jimmy Hawkins as Tommy Bailey * Karolyn Grimes as Zuzu Bailey * Larry Simms as Pete Bailey * Carol Coomes -LRB- AKA Carol Coombs -RRB- as Janie Bailey * Charles Halton -LRB- uncredited -RRB- as Carter , bank examiner * Joseph Kearns -LRB- uncredited voice -RRB- as Angel Joseph * Moroni Olsen -LRB- uncredited vouce -RRB- as the senior angle * J. Farrell MacDonald -LRB- uncredited -RRB- as the man whose grandfather planted the tree * Evelyn Moriarty -LRB- uncredited -RRB- as Girl in the bar * Carl `` Alfalfa '' Switzer as Freddie -LRB- Mary 's annoying high school suitor -RRB- * Max Wagner as Cashier/Bouncer at Nick 's Bar * Tom Fadden -LRB- uncredited -RRB- as Bridge Caretaker * Stanley Andrews -LRB- uncredited -RRB- as Mr. Welch * Ellen Corby -LRB- uncredited -RRB- as Miss Davis * Adriana Caselotti -LRB- uncredited -RRB- as the singer in Martini 's Bar The contention that James Stewart is often referred to as Capra 's only choice to play George Bailey is disputed by film historian Stephen Cox , who indicates that `` Henry Fonda was in the running . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0068	Although it was stated that Jean Arthur , Ann Dvorak and Ginger Rogers were all considered for the role of Mary before Donna Reed won the part , this list is also disputed by Cox as he indicates that Jean Arthur was first offered the part but had to turn it down for a prior commitment on Broadway before Capra turned to Olivia de Havilland , Martha Scott and Ann Dvorak .
It's a Wonderful Life.0069	Ginger Rogers was offered the female lead , but turned it down because she considered it `` too bland '' .
It's a Wonderful Life.0070	In Chapter 26 of her autobiography Ginger : My Story , she questioned her decision by asking her readers : `` Foolish , you say ? ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0071	A long list of actors were considered for the role of Potter -LRB- originally named Herbert Potter -RRB- : Edward Arnold , Charles Bickford , Edgar Buchanan , Louis Calhern , Victor Jory , Raymond Massey , Vincent Price and even Thomas Mitchell .
It's a Wonderful Life.0072	However , Lionel Barrymore , who eventually won the role , was a famous Ebenezer Scrooge in radio dramatizations of A Christmas Carol at the time and was a natural choice for the role .
It's a Wonderful Life.0073	Barrymore had also worked with Capra on his 1938 Best Picture Oscar winner , You Ca n't Take It with You .
It's a Wonderful Life.0074	H.B. Warner , who was cast as the drugstore owner Mr. Gower , actually studied medicine before going into acting .
It's a Wonderful Life.0075	He was also in some of Capra 's other films , including Mr. Deeds Goes to Town , Lost Horizon , You Ca n't Take It with You , and Mr. Smith Goes to Washington .
It's a Wonderful Life.0076	In the silent era , he had played the role of Jesus Christ in Cecil B. DeMille 's The King of Kings -LRB- 1927 -RRB- .
It's a Wonderful Life.0077	The name Gower came from Capra 's employer Columbia Pictures , which had been located on Gower Street for many years .
It's a Wonderful Life.0078	Also on Gower Street was a drugstore that was a favorite for the studio 's employees .
It's a Wonderful Life.0079	Charles Williams , who was cast as Eustace Bailey , and Mary Treen , who was cast as Matilda `` Tilly '' Bailey , were both B-list actors , as they both had appeared in 90 films each before filming It 's a Wonderful Life .
It's a Wonderful Life.0080	Jimmy the Raven -LRB- Uncle Billy 's pet -RRB- appeared in You Ca n't Take It with You and each subsequent Capra film .
It's a Wonderful Life.0081	Production Background The original story `` The Greatest Gift '' was written by Philip Van Doren Stern in November 1939 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0082	After being unsuccessful in getting the story published , he decided to make it into a Christmas card , and mailed 200 copies to family and friends in December 1943 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0083	The story came to the attention of RKO producer David Hempstead , who showed it to Cary Grant 's Hollywood agent , and in April 1944 , RKO Pictures bought the rights to the story for $ 10,000 , hoping to turn the story into a vehicle for Grant .
It's a Wonderful Life.0084	RKO created three unsatisfactory scripts before shelving the planned movie , and Grant went on to make another Christmas movie staple , The Bishop 's Wife .
It's a Wonderful Life.0085	At the suggestion of RKO studio chief Charles Koerner , Frank Capra read `` The Greatest Gift '' and immediately saw its potential .
It's a Wonderful Life.0086	RKO , anxious to unload the project , in 1945 sold the rights to Capra 's production company , Liberty Films , which had a nine-film distribution agreement with RKO , for $ 10,000 , and threw in the three scripts for free .
It's a Wonderful Life.0087	Capra , along with writers Frances Goodrich and Albert Hackett , with Jo Swerling , Michael Wilson , and Dorothy Parker brought in to `` polish '' the script , turned the story and what was worth using from the three scripts into a screenplay that Capra would rename It 's a Wonderful Life .
It's a Wonderful Life.0088	The script underwent many revisions throughout pre-production and during filming .
It's a Wonderful Life.0089	Final screenplay credit went to Goodrich , Hackett and Capra , with `` additional scenes '' by Jo Swerling .
It's a Wonderful Life.0090	Seneca Falls , New York claims that when Frank Capra visited their town in 1945 , he was inspired to model Bedford Falls after it .
It's a Wonderful Life.0091	The town has an annual -LSB- http://www.therealbedfordfalls.com/ `` It 's a Wonderful Life festival '' -RSB- in December .
It's a Wonderful Life.0092	In mid-2009 , The Hotel Clarence opened in Seneca Falls , named for George Bailey 's guardian angel .
It's a Wonderful Life.0093	On December 10 , 2010 , the `` It 's a Wonderful Life '' Museum opened in Seneca Falls , with Karolyn Grimes , who played Zuzu in the movie , cutting the ribbon .
It's a Wonderful Life.0094	Both James Stewart , -LRB- from Indiana , Pennsylvania -RRB- , and Donna Reed , -LRB- from Denison , Iowa -RRB- , came from small towns .
It's a Wonderful Life.0095	Stewart 's father ran a small hardware store where James worked for years .
It's a Wonderful Life.0096	Reed demonstrated her rural roots by winning an impromptu bet with Lionel Barrymore when he challenged her to milk a cow on set .
It's a Wonderful Life.0097	Filming It 's a Wonderful Life was shot at RKO Radio Pictures Studio in Culver City , California , and the 89 acre RKO movie ranch in Encino , where `` Bedford Falls '' consisted of Art Director Max Ree 's Oscar winning sets originally designed for the 1931 epic film Cimarron that covered 4 acres -LRB- 1.6 ha -RRB- , assembled from three separate parts , with a main street stretching 300 yards -LRB- three city blocks -RRB- , with 75 stores and buildings , and a residential neighborhood .
It's a Wonderful Life.0098	For ` IAWL ' Capra built a working bank set , added a tree-lined center parkway , and planted 20 full grown oak trees to existing sets .
It's a Wonderful Life.0099	Pigeons , cats , and dogs were allowed to roam the mammoth set in order to give the `` town '' a lived-in feel .
It's a Wonderful Life.0100	Due to the requirement to film in an `` alternate universe '' setting as well as during different seasons , the set was extremely adaptable .
It's a Wonderful Life.0101	RKO created `` chemical snow '' for the film in order to avoid the need for dubbed dialogue when actors walked across the earlier type of movie snow , made up of crushed cornflakes .
It's a Wonderful Life.0102	Filming started on April 15 , 1946 and ended on July 27 , 1946 , exactly on deadline for the 90-day principal photography schedule .
It's a Wonderful Life.0103	RKO 's movie ranch in Encino , a filming location of `` Bedford Falls '' , was razed in 1954 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0104	There are only two surviving locations from the film .
It's a Wonderful Life.0105	The first is the swimming pool that was unveiled during the famous dance scene where George courts Mary .
It's a Wonderful Life.0106	It is located in the gymnasium at Beverly Hills High School and is still in operation as of 2008 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0107	The second is the `` Martini home '' , at 4587 Viro Road in La Cañada Flintridge , California .
It's a Wonderful Life.0108	During filming , in the scene where Uncle Billy gets drunk at Harry and Ruth 's welcome home/newlyweds ' party , George points him in the right direction home .
It's a Wonderful Life.0109	As the camera focuses on George , smiling at his uncle staggering away , a crash is heard in the distance and Uncle Billy yells , `` I 'm all right !
It's a Wonderful Life.0110	I 'm all right ! ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0111	Equipment on the set had actually been accidentally knocked over ; Capra left in Thomas Mitchell 's impromptu ad lib -LRB- although the `` crashing '' noise was augmented with added sound effects -RRB- .
It's a Wonderful Life.0112	Dimitri Tiomkin had written Death Telegram and Gower 's Deliverance for the drugstore scenes , but in the editing room Capra elected to go with no music for those scenes .
It's a Wonderful Life.0113	Those changes , along with others , led to a falling out between Tiomkin and Capra .
It's a Wonderful Life.0114	Tiomkin had worked on a lot of Capra 's previous films , and was saddened that Capra decided to have the music pared or toned down , moved , or cut entirely .
It's a Wonderful Life.0115	He felt as though his work was being seen as a mere suggestion .
It's a Wonderful Life.0116	In his autobiography Please Do n't Hate Me , he said of the incident , `` an all around scissors job '' .
It's a Wonderful Life.0117	The products and advertisements featured in Mr. Gower 's drugstore include Coca-Cola , Paterson tobacco pipes , La Unica cigars , Camel cigarettes , Lucky Strike cigarettes , Chesterfield cigarettes , Vaseline hair tonic , Penetro cough syrup , Pepto-Bismol , Bayer Aspirin -LRB- `` for colds and influenza '' -RRB- , and The Saturday Evening Post .
It's a Wonderful Life.0118	In an earlier draft of the script , the scene where George saves his brother Harry as a child was different .
It's a Wonderful Life.0119	The scene had the boys playing ice hockey on the river -LRB- which is on Potter 's property -RRB- as Potter watches with disdain .
It's a Wonderful Life.0120	George shoots the puck , but it goes astray and breaks the `` No Trespassing '' sign and lands in Potter 's yard .
It's a Wonderful Life.0121	Potter becomes irate , and the gardener releases the attack dogs , which causes the boys to flee .
It's a Wonderful Life.0122	Harry falls in the ice , and George saves him with the same results .
It's a Wonderful Life.0123	Another scene that was in an earlier version of the script had young George visiting his father at his work .
It's a Wonderful Life.0124	After George tells off Mr. Potter and closes the door , he considers asking Uncle Billy about his drugstore dilemma .
It's a Wonderful Life.0125	Billy is talking on the phone to the bank examiner , and lights his cigar and throws his match in the wastebasket .
It's a Wonderful Life.0126	This scene explains that Tilly -LRB- short for Matilda -RRB- and Eustace are both his cousins -LRB- not Billy 's kids though -RRB- , and Tilly is on the phone with her friend Martha and says , `` Potter 's here , the bank examiner 's coming .
It's a Wonderful Life.0127	It 's a day of judgment . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0128	As George is about to interrupt Tilly on the phone , Billy cries for help and Tilly runs in and puts the fire out with a pot of coffee .
It's a Wonderful Life.0129	George decides he is probably better off dealing with the situation by himself .
It's a Wonderful Life.0130	Capra had filmed a number of sequences that were subsequently cut , the only remnants remaining being rare stills that have been unearthed .
It's a Wonderful Life.0131	A number of alternative endings were considered , with Capra 's first script having Bailey falling to his knees reciting The Lord 's Prayer -LRB- the script also called for an opening scene with the townspeople in prayer -RRB- .
It's a Wonderful Life.0132	Feeling that an overly religious tone did not have the emotional impact of the family and friends rushing to rescue George Bailey , the closing scenes were rewritten .
It's a Wonderful Life.0133	Reception It 's a Wonderful Life premiered at the Globe Theatre in New York on December 20 , 1946 , to mixed reviews .
It's a Wonderful Life.0134	While Capra considered the contemporary critical reviews to be either universally negative or at best dismissive , Time said , `` It 's a Wonderful Life is a pretty wonderful movie .
It's a Wonderful Life.0135	It has only one formidable rival -LRB- Goldwyn 's The Best Years of Our Lives -RRB- as Hollywood 's best picture of the year .
It's a Wonderful Life.0136	Director Capra 's inventiveness , humor and affection for human beings keep it glowing with life and excitement . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0137	Bosley Crowther , writing for The New York Times , complimented some of the actors , including Stewart and Reed , but concluded that `` the weakness of this picture , from this reviewer 's point of view , is the sentimentality of it -- its illusory concept of life .
It's a Wonderful Life.0138	Mr. Capra 's nice people are charming , his small town is a quite beguiling place and his pattern for solving problems is most optimistic and facile .
It's a Wonderful Life.0139	But somehow they all resemble theatrical attitudes rather than average realities . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0140	The film , which went into general release on January 7 , 1947 , placed 26th -LRB- $ 3.3 million -RRB- in box office revenues for 1947 -LRB- out of more than 400 features released -RRB- , one place ahead of another Christmas film , Miracle on 34th Street .
It's a Wonderful Life.0141	The film was supposed to be released in January 1947 , but was moved up to December 1946 to make it eligible for the 1946 Academy Awards .
It's a Wonderful Life.0142	This move was seen as worse for the film , as 1947 did not have quite the stiff competition as 1946 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0143	If it had entered the 1947 Awards , its biggest competition would have been Miracle On 34th Street .
It's a Wonderful Life.0144	The number one grossing movie of 1947 , The Best Years of Our Lives , made $ 11.5 million .
It's a Wonderful Life.0145	The film recorded a loss of $ 525,000 at the box office for RKO .
It's a Wonderful Life.0146	On May 26 , 1947 , the FBI issued a memo stating `` With regard to the picture `` It 's a Wonderful Life '' , -LSB- redacted -RSB- stated in substance that the film represented rather obvious attempts to discredit bankers by casting Lionel Barrymore as a ` scrooge-type ' so that he would be the most hated man in the picture .
It's a Wonderful Life.0147	This , according to these sources , is a common trick used by Communists .
It's a Wonderful Life.0148	-LSB- In -RSB- addition , -LSB- redacted -RSB- stated that , in his opinion , this picture deliberately maligned the upper class , attempting to show the people who had money were mean and despicable characters . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0149	In an interview with Michael Parkinson in 1973 , Jimmy Stewart declared that out of all the movies he had made , It 's a Wonderful Life was his favorite .
It's a Wonderful Life.0150	In 1990 , It 's a Wonderful Life was deemed `` culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant '' by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in their National Film Registry .
It's a Wonderful Life.0151	In 2002 , Britain 's Channel 4 ranked It 's a Wonderful Life as the seventh greatest film ever made in its poll `` The 100 Greatest Films '' and in 2006 , the film reached No. 37 in the same channel 's `` 100 Greatest Family Films '' .
It's a Wonderful Life.0152	In June 2008 , AFI revealed its 10 Top 10 , the best ten films in ten `` classic '' American film genres , after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community .
It's a Wonderful Life.0153	It 's a Wonderful Life was acknowledged as the third-best film in the fantasy genre .
It's a Wonderful Life.0154	Somewhat more iconoclastic views of the film and its content are occasionally expressed .
It's a Wonderful Life.0155	In 1947 , film critic Manny Farber wrote , `` To make his points -LSB- Capra -RSB- always takes an easy , simple-minded path that does n't give much credit to the intelligence of the audience '' , and adds that there are only a `` few unsentimental moments here and there . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0156	Wendell Jamieson , in a 2008 article for The New York Times which was generally positive in its analysis of the film , noted that far from being simply a sweet sentimental story , it `` is a terrifying , asphyxiating story about growing up and relinquishing your dreams , of seeing your father driven to the grave before his time , of living among bitter , small-minded people .
It's a Wonderful Life.0157	It is a story of being trapped , of compromising , of watching others move ahead and away , of becoming so filled with rage that you verbally abuse your children , their teacher and your oppressively perfect wife . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0158	In a 2010 Salon.com piece , Richard Cohen described It 's a Wonderful Life as `` the most terrifying Hollywood film ever made '' ; in the `` Pottersville '' sequence , he wrote , George is not `` seeing the world that would exist had he never been born '' , but rather `` the world as it does exist , in his time and also in our own . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0159	Nine years earlier , another Salon writer , Gary Kamiya , had expressed the opposing view that `` Pottersville rocks ! ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0160	, adding , `` The gauzy , Currier-and-Ives veil Capra drapes over Bedford Falls has prevented viewers from grasping what a tiresome and , frankly , toxic environment it is ... We all live in Pottersville now . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0161	The film 's elevation to the status of a beloved classic came decades after its initial release , when it became a television staple during Christmas season in the late 1970s .
It's a Wonderful Life.0162	This came as a welcome surprise to Frank Capra and others involved with its production .
It's a Wonderful Life.0163	`` It 's the damnedest thing I 've ever seen , '' Capra told the Wall Street Journal in 1984 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0164	`` The film has a life of its own now , and I can look at it like I had nothing to do with it .
It's a Wonderful Life.0165	I 'm like a parent whose kid grows up to be president .
It's a Wonderful Life.0166	I 'm proud ... but it 's the kid who did the work .
It's a Wonderful Life.0167	I did n't even think of it as a Christmas story when I first ran across it .
It's a Wonderful Life.0168	I just liked the idea . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0169	In a 1946 interview , Capra described the film 's theme as `` the individual 's belief in himself '' and that he made it `` to combat a modern trend toward atheism '' .
It's a Wonderful Life.0170	The film 's popularity continues , and it currently holds an 8.7 out of 10 rating on the IMDb consumer reviews and a 93 % `` Fresh '' rating on Rotten Tomatoes .
It's a Wonderful Life.0171	Awards and honors Prior to the Los Angeles release of It 's a Wonderful Life , Liberty Films mounted an extensive promotional campaign that included a daily advertisement highlighting one of the film 's players , along with comments from reviewers .
It's a Wonderful Life.0172	Jimmy Starr wrote , `` If I were an Oscar , I 'd elope with It 's a Wonderful Life lock , stock and barrel on the night of the Academy Awards '' .
It's a Wonderful Life.0173	The New York Daily Times offered an editorial in which it declared the film and James Stewart 's performance to be worthy of Academy Award consideration .
It's a Wonderful Life.0174	It 's a Wonderful Life received five Academy Award nominations : * Best Picture for Frank Capra * Best Director for Frank Capra * Best Actor for James Stewart * Best Editing for William Hornbeck * Best Sound Recording for John Aalberg The Best Years of Our Lives , a drama about servicemen attempting to return to their pre-World War II lives , won most of the awards that year , including four of the five for which It 's a Wonderful Life was nominated .
It's a Wonderful Life.0175	-LRB- The award for `` Best Sound Recording '' was won by The Jolson Story . -RRB-
It's a Wonderful Life.0176	The Best Years of Our Lives was also an outstanding commercial success , ultimately becoming the highest grossing film of the decade , in contrast to the more modest initial box office returns of It 's a Wonderful Life .
It's a Wonderful Life.0177	Capra won the `` Best Motion Picture Director '' award from the Golden Globes , and a `` CEC Award '' from the Cinema Writers Circle in Spain , for Mejor Película Extranjera -LRB- Best Foreign Film -RRB- .
It's a Wonderful Life.0178	Jimmy Hawkins won a `` Former Child Star Lifetime Achievement Award '' from the Young Artist Awards in 1994 ; the award recognized his role as Tommy Bailey as igniting his career , which lasted until the mid-1960s .
It's a Wonderful Life.0179	American Film Institute Lists * AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies -- No. 11 * AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Passions -- No. 8 * AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : ** Mr. Potter - No. 6 Villain ** George Bailey - No. 9 Hero * AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs : ** Buffalo Gal -LRB- Wo n't You Come Out Tonight -RRB- - Nominated * AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : ** `` What is it you want , Mary ?
It's a Wonderful Life.0180	What do you want ?
It's a Wonderful Life.0181	You want the moon ?
It's a Wonderful Life.0182	Just say the word , and I 'll throw a lasso around it and pull it down . ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0183	- Nominated ** `` To my big brother George , the richest man in town ! ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0184	- Nominated ** `` Look , Daddy .
It's a Wonderful Life.0185	Teacher says , `` Every time a bell rings an angel gets his wings . '' ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0186	- Nominated * AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Cheers -- No. 1 * AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies -LRB- 10th Anniversary Edition -RRB- -- No. 20 * AFI 's 10 Top 10 -- No. 3 Fantasy Film Release Ownership and copyright issues Ancillary rights Liberty Films was purchased by Paramount Pictures , and remained a subsidiary until 1951 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0187	In 1955 , M. & A. Alexander purchased the movie .
It's a Wonderful Life.0188	This included key rights to the original television syndication , the original nitrate film elements , the music score , and the film rights to the story on which the film is based , `` The Greatest Gift '' .
It's a Wonderful Life.0189	National Telefilm Associates -LRB- NTA -RRB- took over the rights to the film soon thereafter .
It's a Wonderful Life.0190	A clerical error at NTA prevented the copyright from being renewed properly in 1974 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0191	Despite the lapsed copyright , television stations that aired it still were required to pay royalties .
It's a Wonderful Life.0192	Although the film 's images had entered the public domain , the film 's story was still protected by virtue of it being a derivative work of the published story `` The Greatest Gift '' , whose copyright was properly renewed by Philip Van Doren Stern in 1971 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0193	The film became a perennial holiday favorite in the 1980s , possibly due to its repeated showings each holiday season on hundreds of local television stations .
It's a Wonderful Life.0194	It was mentioned during the deliberations on the Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0195	In 1993 , Republic Pictures , which was the successor to NTA , relied on the 1990 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Stewart v. Abend -LRB- which involved another Stewart film , Rear Window -RRB- to enforce its claim to the copyright .
It's a Wonderful Life.0196	While the film 's copyright had not been renewed , Republic still owned the original film elements , the music score , and the film rights to `` The Greatest Gift '' ; thus the plaintiffs were able to argue its status as a derivative work of a work still under copyright .
It's a Wonderful Life.0197	It 's a Wonderful Life is no longer shown as often on television as it was before enforcement of that derivative copyright .
It's a Wonderful Life.0198	NBC is licensed to show the film on U.S. network television , and traditionally shows it twice during the holidays , with one showing on Christmas Eve .
It's a Wonderful Life.0199	Paramount -LRB- via parent company Viacom 's 1998 acquisition of Republic 's then-parent , Spelling Entertainment -RRB- once again has distribution rights for the first time since 1955 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0200	Due to all the above actions , this is one of the few RKO films not controlled by Turner Entertainment/Warner Bros. in the USA .
It's a Wonderful Life.0201	It is also one of two Capra films which Paramount owns despite not having originally released it -- the other is Broadway Bill -LRB- originally from Columbia , remade by Paramount as Riding High in 1950 -RRB- .
It's a Wonderful Life.0202	Colorization Director Capra met with Wilson Markle about having Colorization , Inc. , colorize It 's a Wonderful Life based on an enthusiastic response to the colorization of Topper from actor Cary Grant .
It's a Wonderful Life.0203	The company 's art director Brian Holmes prepared 10 minutes of colorized footage from It 's a Wonderful Life for Capra to view , which resulted in Capra signing a contract with Colorization , Inc. , and his `` enthusiastic agree -LSB- ment -RSB- to pay half the $ 260,000 cost of colorizing the movie and to share any profits '' and giving `` preliminary approval to making similar color versions of two of his other black-and-white films , Meet John Doe -LRB- 1941 -RRB- and Lady for a Day -LRB- 1933 -RRB- '' .
It's a Wonderful Life.0204	However , the film was believed to be in the public domain at the time , and as a result Markle and Holmes responded by returning Capra 's initial investment , eliminating his financial participation , and refusing outright to allow the director to exercise artistic control over the colorization of his films , leading Capra to join in the campaign against the process .
It's a Wonderful Life.0205	Three colorized versions have been produced .
It's a Wonderful Life.0206	The first was released by Hal Roach Studios in 1986 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0207	The second was authorized and produced by the film 's permanent owner , Republic Pictures , in 1989 , with better results .
It's a Wonderful Life.0208	Both Capra and Stewart took a critical stand on the colorized editions .
It's a Wonderful Life.0209	The Hal Roach color version was re-released in 1989 to VHS through the cooperation of Video Treasures .
It's a Wonderful Life.0210	A third colorized version was produced by Legend Films and released on DVD in 2007 with the approval of Capra 's estate .
It's a Wonderful Life.0211	Home media VHS Throughout the 1980s and early 1990s , when the film was still under public domain status , It 's A Wonderful Life was released on VHS by a variety of home video companies .
It's a Wonderful Life.0212	Among the companies that released the film on home video before Republic Pictures stepped in were Meda Video -LRB- which would later become Media Home Entertainment -RRB- , Kartes Video Communications -LRB- under its Video Film Classics label -RRB- , GoodTimes Home Video and Video Treasures -LRB- now Anchor Bay Entertainment -RRB- .
It's a Wonderful Life.0213	After Republic reclaimed the rights to the film , all unofficial VHS copies of the film in print were destroyed .
It's a Wonderful Life.0214	Artisan Entertainment -LRB- under license from Republic -RRB- took over home video rights in the mid-1990s .
It's a Wonderful Life.0215	Artisan was later sold to Lions Gate Entertainment , which continued to hold US home video rights until late 2005 when they reverted to Paramount , who also owns video rights throughout Region 4 -LRB- Latin America and Australia -RRB- and in France .
It's a Wonderful Life.0216	Video rights in the rest of the world are held by different companies ; for example , the UK rights are with Universal Studios .
It's a Wonderful Life.0217	Technological first : CD-ROM In 1993 , due in part to the confusion of the ownership and copyright issues , Kinesoft Development , with the support of Republic Pictures , released It 's a Wonderful Life as one of the first commercial feature-length films on CD-ROM for the Windows PC -LRB- Windows 3.1 -RRB- .
It's a Wonderful Life.0218	Predating commercial DVDs by several years , it included such features as the ability to follow along with the complete shooting script as the film was playing .
It's a Wonderful Life.0219	Given the state of video playback on the PC at the time of its release , It 's a Wonderful Life for Windows represented another first , as the longest running video on a computer .
It's a Wonderful Life.0220	Prior to its release , Windows could only play back approx .
It's a Wonderful Life.0221	32,000 frames of video , or about 35 minutes at 15 frames per second .
It's a Wonderful Life.0222	Working with Microsoft , Kinesoft was able to enhance the video features of Windows to allow for the complete playback of the entire film -- all of this on a PC with a 486SX processor and only 8 MB of RAM .
It's a Wonderful Life.0223	DVD and Blu-ray The film has seen multiple DVD releases since the availability of the DVD format .
It's a Wonderful Life.0224	In the autumn of 2001 , Republic issued the movie twice , once in August , and again with different packaging in September of that same year .
It's a Wonderful Life.0225	On October 31 , 2006 , Paramount released a newly restored `` 60th Anniversary Edition '' .
It's a Wonderful Life.0226	On November 13 , 2007 , Paramount released a two-disc `` special edition '' DVD of the film that contained both the original theatrical black-and-white version , and a new , third colorized version , produced by Legend Films using the latest colorization technology .
It's a Wonderful Life.0227	On November 3 , 2009 , Paramount released a DVD version with a `` Collector 's Edition Ornament '' , and a Blu-ray edition .
It's a Wonderful Life.0228	Adaptations in other media The film was twice adapted for radio in 1947 , first on Lux Radio Theater -LRB- March 10 -RRB- and then on The Screen Guild Theater -LRB- December 29 -RRB- , then again on the Screen Guild Theater broadcast of March 15 , 1951 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0229	James Stewart and Donna Reed reprised their roles for all three radio productions .
It's a Wonderful Life.0230	Stewart also starred in the May 8 , 1949 radio adaptation presented on the Screen Director 's Playhouse .
It's a Wonderful Life.0231	A musical stage adaptation of the film , titled A Wonderful Life , was written by Sheldon Harnick and Joe Raposo .
It's a Wonderful Life.0232	This version was first performed at the University of Michigan in 1986 , but a planned professional production was stalled by legal wrangling with the estate of Philip Van Doren Stern .
It's a Wonderful Life.0233	It was eventually performed in Washington , D.C. by Arena Stage in 1991 , and had revivals in the 21st century , including a staged concert version in New York City in 2005 and several productions by regional theatres .
It's a Wonderful Life.0234	Another musical stage adaptation of the film , titled `` It 's a Wonderful Life - The Musical '' , was written by Bruce Greer and Keith Ferguson .
It's a Wonderful Life.0235	This version premiered at the Majestic Theatre , Dallas , Texas in 1998 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0236	It was an annual Christmas show at the theatre for five years .
It's a Wonderful Life.0237	It has since been performed at venues all around the United States .
It's a Wonderful Life.0238	The film was also adapted into a play in two acts by James W. Rodgers .
It's a Wonderful Life.0239	It was first performed on December 15 , 1993 at Paul Laurence Dunbar High School .
It's a Wonderful Life.0240	The play opens with George Bailey contemplating suicide and then goes back through major moments in his life .
It's a Wonderful Life.0241	Many of the scenes from the movie are only alluded to or mentioned in the play rather than actually dramatized .
It's a Wonderful Life.0242	For example , in the opening scene Clarence just mentions George having saved his brother Harry after the latter had fallen through the ice .
It's a Wonderful Life.0243	It 's a Wonderful Life : A Live Radio Play , a stage adaptation presented as a 1940s radio show , was adapted by Joe Landry and has been produced around the United States since 1997 .
It's a Wonderful Life.0244	The script is published by Playscripts , Inc. .
It's a Wonderful Life.0245	Philip Grecian 's 2006 radio play based on the film It 's a Wonderful Life is a faithful adaptation , now in its third incarnation , that has been performed numerous times by local theatres in Canada .
It's a Wonderful Life.0246	In a June 2011 interview , John McDaniel told Saint Louis Magazine , `` I 'm in the throes of writing a musical version ... right now , working with Kathie Lee Gifford , who 's doing the lyrics .
It's a Wonderful Life.0247	I find we 're mostly writing to character : Is it George , or the old guy who runs the bank ?
It's a Wonderful Life.0248	What do they want , what are they trying to do , what is the mood of that -- is it staccato , are they agitated , is it a ballad ? ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0249	The Last Temptation of Clarence Odbody is a novel written by John Pierson .
It's a Wonderful Life.0250	The novel imagines the future lives of various characters if George had not survived his jump into the river .
It's a Wonderful Life.0251	Popular culture It 's a Wonderful Life has been popularized in modern cultural references in many of the mainstream media .
It's a Wonderful Life.0252	Due to the proliferation of these references , a few examples will suffice to illustrate the film 's impact .
It's a Wonderful Life.0253	* The Sesame Street Muppets characters Bert and Ernie share their names with the cop and the taxicab driver in the film .
It's a Wonderful Life.0254	Longtime Muppets writer and puppeteer Jerry Juhl said he believed there was no connection and that this was a coincidence .
It's a Wonderful Life.0255	The episode Elmo Saves Christmas -LRB- 1996 -RRB- , which featured a clip from the film , pokes fun at the persistent reports of a connection , having them look at each other in disbelief as George calls Bert and Ernie by name .
It's a Wonderful Life.0256	* In a direct reference to the film , The Simpsons episode `` The PTA Disbands '' places a caricature of James Stewart 's character in a local bank , who paraphrases the infamous bank run scene , which promptly starts a brawl .
It's a Wonderful Life.0257	* Stephen Jay Gould 's book Wonderful Life : The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History takes its main title from the film .
It's a Wonderful Life.0258	The book proposes that the evolution of life , rewound and replayed multiple times , would yield a different world each time , just as life without George Bailey is Pottersville , not Bedford Falls .
It's a Wonderful Life.0259	* Billy Peltzer 's home town of Kingston Falls in the film Gremlins -LRB- 1984 -RRB- is laid out to look like Bedford Falls .
It's a Wonderful Life.0260	Clips from It 's A Wonderful Life also appear within the film .
It's a Wonderful Life.0261	* The 2002 television film It 's a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie is a direct homage to the film in which Kermit the Frog discovers his life if he was never born after losing the Muppet Theater to a spoiled banker .
It's a Wonderful Life.0262	* The 1989 film The Adventures of Ford Fairlane has a character named Zuzu Petals , named after the rose petals that George Bailey puts in his pants pockets , which are referenced several times .
It's a Wonderful Life.0263	* The Killers ' single `` Boots '' -LRB- 2010 -RRB- is a `` Christmas '' release in benefit of the RED foundation and directly relates to It 's a Wonderful Life , using scenes from the film in the companion video .
It's a Wonderful Life.0264	* In `` It 's a Hopeful Life '' , the Christmas 2011 episode of Raising Hope , Jimmy dreams how life for his family would have been had his daughter Hope not been born , including separation for his parents , prostitution for Sabrina and accidental death for Maw Maw , the `` Clarence '' of this story .
It's a Wonderful Life.0265	The episode 's climax has Jimmy running down the main street , shouting `` Merry Christmas , movie house ! ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0266	In an odd coincidence , this is the second time Cloris Leachman has played the angel , having previously starred as Clara in the 1977 TV remake It Happened One Christmas .
It's a Wonderful Life.0267	* The VeggieTales episode It 's a Meaningful Life was inspired by the film , with Larry the Cucumber as Stewart , a toy factory owner who experiences what his life and the lives of his family and friends would have been like had he made a game-winning catch in a college football game .
It's a Wonderful Life.0268	* In an episode of Mork & Mindy , after Mork disrupts one of Mind 's dates , he has Orson show what Mindy -LRB- and her family 's -RRB- lives would have been had he not been a part of it .
It's a Wonderful Life.0269	After seeing how their lives turned out , Mork begs Orson to return him to the real world .
It's a Wonderful Life.0270	When Mindy recognizes him again , he exclaims , `` Oh , it 's a wonderful life ! ''
It's a Wonderful Life.0271	Antecedent In a 1997 review , film historian James Berardinelli commented on the parallels between this film and the classic Charles Dickens tale A Christmas Carol .
It's a Wonderful Life.0272	In both stories , a man revisits his life and potential death -LRB- or non-existence -RRB- with the help of supernatural agents , culminating in a joyous epiphany and a renewed view of his life .
It's a Wonderful Life.0273	Spin-offs The film was remade as the 1977 television movie It Happened One Christmas .
It's a Wonderful Life.0274	Lionel Chetwynd based the screenplay on the original Van Doren Stern short story and the 1946 screenplay .
It's a Wonderful Life.0275	This remake employed gender-reversal , with Marlo Thomas as the protagonist Mary Bailey , Wayne Rogers as George Hatch , and Cloris Leachman as the angel Clara Oddbody .
It's a Wonderful Life.0276	Leachman received her second Emmy nomination for this role .
It's a Wonderful Life.0277	In a significant departure from his earlier roles , Orson Welles was cast as Mr. Potter .
It's a Wonderful Life.0278	Following initial positive reviews , the made-for-television film was rebroadcast twice in 1978 and 1979 , but has not been shown since on national re-broadcasts , nor issued in home media .
It's a Wonderful Life.0279	In 1991 , another made-for-television film called Clarence starred Robert Carradine in a new tale of the helpful angel .
Oriental Weekly (Canada).0000	bytes = `` 1249 '' > Oriental Weekly , -LRB- 東方報 -RRB- is a Chinese Language ethnic weekly newspaper based out of Calgary , Alberta .
Oriental Weekly (Canada).0001	It was founded in 1981 to serve the growing Chinese population in Western Canada .
Oriental Weekly (Canada).0002	Oriental Weekly is owned by Trend Media Inc. -LRB- Calgary , Alberta -RRB- , parent company of another Weekly Chinese Newspaper , Trend Weekly -LRB- 閒情報 -RRB- .
Oriental Weekly (Canada).0003	Its publisher is Danny Chan , 30 years veteran of Chinese publishing in Canada .
Oriental Weekly (Canada).0004	Oriental Weekly is available every Thursday from authorized vendors , free of charge .
Oriental Weekly (Canada).0005	Its key contents include , community news , local news , government news on Federal , Provincial & Municipal levels .
Trend Weekly (Canada).0000	bytes = `` 1140 '' > Trend Weekly , -LRB- 閒情報 -RRB- is a Chinese language ethnic weekly newspaper based out of Calgary , Alberta .
Trend Weekly (Canada).0001	It was founded in 2001 to serve the growing Chinese population in Western Canada .
Trend Weekly (Canada).0002	Trend Weekly is owned by Trend Media Inc. -LRB- Calgary , Alberta -RRB- , parent company of another weekly Chinese newspaper , Oriental Weekly -LRB- 東方報 -RRB- .
Trend Weekly (Canada).0003	Its publisher is Danny Chan , 30 years veteran of Chinese publishing in Canada .
Trend Weekly (Canada).0004	Trend Weekly is available every Thursday from authorized vendors , free of charge .
Trend Weekly (Canada).0005	Its key contents include lifestyle news , consumer trends and local community news .
Plant nutrition.0000	bytes = `` 27639 '' > right Plant Nutrition is the study of the chemical elements that are necessary for growth .
Plant nutrition.0001	In 1972 , E. Epstein defined two criteria for an element to be essential for plant growth : # in its absence the plant is unable to complete a normal life cycle ; or # that the element is part of some essential plant constituent or metabolite .
Plant nutrition.0002	This is in accordance with Liebig 's law of the minimum .
Plant nutrition.0003	There are 17 essential plant nutrients .
Plant nutrition.0004	Carbon and oxygen are absorbed from the air , while other nutrients including water are obtained from the soil .
Plant nutrition.0005	Plants must obtain the following mineral nutrients from the growing media : * the primary macronutrients : nitrogen -LRB- N -RRB- , phosphorus -LRB- P -RRB- , potassium -LRB- K -RRB- * the three secondary macronutrients : calcium -LRB- Ca -RRB- , sulphur -LRB- S -RRB- , magnesium -LRB- Mg -RRB- * the macronutrient Silicon -LRB- Si -RRB- * the micronutrients/trace minerals : boron -LRB- B -RRB- , chlorine -LRB- Cl -RRB- , manganese -LRB- Mn -RRB- , iron -LRB- Fe -RRB- , zinc -LRB- Zn -RRB- , copper -LRB- Cu -RRB- , molybdenum -LRB- Mo -RRB- , nickel -LRB- Ni -RRB- , selenium -LRB- Se -RRB- , and sodium -LRB- Na -RRB- The macronutrients are consumed in larger quantities and are present in plant tissue in quantities from 0.2 % to 4.0 % -LRB- on a dry matter weight basis -RRB- .
Plant nutrition.0006	Micro nutrients are present in plant tissue in quantities measured in parts per million , ranging from 5 to 200 ppm , or less than 0.02 % dry weight .
Plant nutrition.0007	Most soil conditions across the world can provide plants with adequate nutrition and do not require fertilizer for a complete life cycle .
Plant nutrition.0008	However , man can artificially modify soil through the addition of fertilizer to promote vigorous growth and increase yield .
Plant nutrition.0009	The plants are able to obtain their required nutrients from the fertilizer added to the soil .
Plant nutrition.0010	A colloidal carbonaceous residue , known as humus , can serve as a nutrient reservoir .
Plant nutrition.0011	Besides lack of water and sunshine , nutrient deficiency is a major growth limiting factor .
Plant nutrition.0012	Nutrient uptake in the soil is achieved by cation exchange , where root hairs pump hydrogen ions -LRB- H + -RRB- into the soil through proton pumps .
Plant nutrition.0013	These hydrogen ions displace cations attached to negatively charged soil particles so that the cations are available for uptake by the root .
Plant nutrition.0014	Plant nutrition is a difficult subject to understand completely , partially because of the variation between different plants and even between different species or individuals of a given clone .
Plant nutrition.0015	An element present at a low level may cause deficiency symptoms , while the same element at a higher level may cause toxicity .
Plant nutrition.0016	Further , deficiency of one element may present as symptoms of toxicity from another element .
Plant nutrition.0017	An abundance of one nutrient may cause a deficiency of another nutrient .
Plant nutrition.0018	Also a lowered availability of a given nutrient , such as SO24 − can affect the uptake of another nutrient , such as NO3 -- .
Plant nutrition.0019	Also , K + uptake can be influenced by the amount NH4 + available .
Plant nutrition.0020	The root , especially the root hair , is the most essential organ for the uptake of nutrients .
Plant nutrition.0021	The structure and architecture of the root can alter the rate of nutrient uptake .
Plant nutrition.0022	Nutrient ions are transported to the center of the root , the stele in order for the nutrients to reach the conducting tissues , xylem and phloem .
Plant nutrition.0023	The Casparian strip , a cell wall outside of the stele but within the root , prevents passive flow of water and nutrients to help regulate the uptake of nutrients and water .
Plant nutrition.0024	Xylem moves water and inorganic molecules within the plant and phloem counts organic molecule transportation .
Plant nutrition.0025	Water potential plays a key role in a plants nutrient uptake .
Plant nutrition.0026	If the water potential is more negative within the plant than the surrounding soils , the nutrients will move from the more higher solute -LRB- soil -RRB- concentration to lower solute concentration -LRB- plant -RRB- .
Plant nutrition.0027	There are three fundamental ways plants uptake nutrients through the root : 1 . -RRB-
Plant nutrition.0028	simple diffusion , occurs when a nonpolar molecule , such as O2 , CO2 , and NH3 that follow a concentration gradient , can passively move through the lipid bilayer membrane without the use of transport proteins .
Plant nutrition.0029	2 . -RRB-
Plant nutrition.0030	facilitated diffusion , is the rapid movement of solutes or ions following a concentration gradient , facilitated by transport proteins .
Plant nutrition.0031	3 . -RRB-
Plant nutrition.0032	Active transport , is the active transport of ions or molecules against a concentration gradient that requires an energy source , usually ATP , to pump the ions or molecules through the membrane .
Plant nutrition.0033	* Nutrients are moved inside a plant to where they are most needed .
Plant nutrition.0034	For example , a plant will try to supply more nutrients to its younger leaves than its older ones .
Plant nutrition.0035	So when nutrients are mobile , the lack of nutrients is first visible on older leaves .
Plant nutrition.0036	However , not all nutrients are equally mobile .
Plant nutrition.0037	When a less mobile nutrient is lacking , the younger leaves suffer because the nutrient does not move up to them but stays lower in the older leaves .
Plant nutrition.0038	Nitrogen , phosphorus , and potassium are mobile nutrients , while the others have varying degrees of mobility .
Plant nutrition.0039	This phenomenon is helpful in determining what nutrients a plant may be lacking .
Plant nutrition.0040	A symbiotic relationship may exist with 1 . -RRB-
Plant nutrition.0041	Nitrogen-fixing bacteria , such as rhizobia , which are involved with nitrogen fixation , and 2 . -RRB-
Plant nutrition.0042	mycorrhiza , which help to create a larger root surface area .
Plant nutrition.0043	Both of these mutualistic relationships enhance nutrient uptake .
Plant nutrition.0044	Though nitrogen is plentiful in the Earth 's atmosphere , relatively few plants engage in nitrogen fixation -LRB- conversion of atmospheric nitrogen to a biologically useful form -RRB- .
Plant nutrition.0045	Most plants therefore require nitrogen compounds to be present in the soil in which they grow .
Plant nutrition.0046	These can either be supplied by decaying matter , nitrogen fixing bacteria , animal waste , or through the agricultural application of purpose made fertilizers .
Plant nutrition.0047	Hydroponics , is growing plants in a water-nutrient solution without the use of nutrient-rich soil .
Plant nutrition.0048	It allows researchers and home gardeners to grow their plants in a controlled environment .
Plant nutrition.0049	The most common solution , is the Hoagland solution , developed by D. R. Hoagland in 1933 , the solution consists of all the essential nutrients in the correct proportions necessary for most plant growth .
Plant nutrition.0050	An aerator is used to prevent an anoxic event or hypoxia .
Plant nutrition.0051	Hypoxia can affect nutrient uptake of a plant because without oxygen present , respiration becomes inhibited within the root cells .
Plant nutrition.0052	The Nutrient film technique is a variation of hydroponic technique .
Plant nutrition.0053	The roots are not fully submerged , which allows for adequate aeration of the roots , while a `` film '' thin layer of nutrient rich water is pumped through the system to provide nutrients and water to the plant .
Plant nutrition.0054	Processes Plants uptake essential elements from the soil through their roots and from the air -LRB- mainly consisting of nitrogen and oxygen -RRB- through their leaves .
Plant nutrition.0055	Nutrient uptake in the soil is achieved by cation exchange , wherein root hairs pump hydrogen ions -LRB- H + -RRB- into the soil through proton pumps .
Plant nutrition.0056	These hydrogen ions displace cations attached to negatively charged soil particles so that the cations are available for uptake by the root .
Plant nutrition.0057	In the leaves , stomata open to take in carbon dioxide and expel oxygen .
Plant nutrition.0058	The carbon dioxide molecules are used as the carbon source in photosynthesis .
Plant nutrition.0059	Functions of nutrients Although nitrogen is plentiful in the Earth 's atmosphere , relatively few plants engage in nitrogen fixation -LRB- conversion of atmospheric nitrogen to a biologically useful form -RRB- .
Plant nutrition.0060	Most plants therefore require nitrogen compounds to be present in the soil in which they grow .
Plant nutrition.0061	Plant nutrition is a difficult subject to understand completely , partially because of the variation between different plants and even between different species or individuals of a given clone .
Plant nutrition.0062	Elements present at low levels may cause deficiency symptoms , and toxicity is possible at levels that are too high .
Plant nutrition.0063	Furthermore , deficiency of one element may present as symptoms of toxicity from another element , and vice versa .
Plant nutrition.0064	Carbon and oxygen are absorbed from the air , while other nutrients are absorbed from the soil .
Plant nutrition.0065	Green plants obtain their carbohydrate supply from the carbon dioxide in the air by the process of photosynthesis .
Plant nutrition.0066	Each of these nutrients is used in a different place for a different essential function .
Plant nutrition.0067	Macronutrients -LRB- derived from air and water -RRB- Carbon Carbon forms the backbone of many plants biomolecules , including starches and cellulose .
Plant nutrition.0068	Carbon is fixed through photosynthesis from the carbon dioxide in the air and is a part of the carbohydrates that store energy in the plant .
Plant nutrition.0069	Hydrogen Hydrogen also is necessary for building sugars and building the plant .
Plant nutrition.0070	It is obtained almost entirely from water .
Plant nutrition.0071	Hydrogen ions are imperative for a proton gradient to help drive the electron transport chain in photosynthesis and for respiration .
Plant nutrition.0072	Oxygen Oxygen by itself or in the molecules of H2O or CO2 are necessary for plant cellular respiration .
Plant nutrition.0073	Cellular respiration is the process of generating energy-rich adenosine triphosphate -LRB- ATP -RRB- via the consumption of sugars made in photosynthesis .
Plant nutrition.0074	Plants produce oxygen gas during photosynthesis to produce glucose but then require oxygen to undergo aerobic photorespiration and break down this glucose and produce ATP .
Plant nutrition.0075	Macronutrients -LRB- primary -RRB- Phosphorus Phosphorus is important in plant bioenergetics .
Plant nutrition.0076	As a component of ATP , phosphorus is needed for the conversion of light energy to chemical energy -LRB- ATP -RRB- during photosynthesis .
Plant nutrition.0077	Phosphorus can also be used to modify the activity of various enzymes by phosphorylation , and can be used for cell signaling .
Plant nutrition.0078	Since ATP can be used for the biosynthesis of many plant biomolecules , phosphorus is important for plant growth and flower/seed formation .
Plant nutrition.0079	Phosphate esters make up DNA , RNA , and phospholipids .
Plant nutrition.0080	Most common in the form of polyprotic phosphoric acid -LRB- H3PO4 -RRB- in soil , but it is taken up most readily in the form of H2PO4 .
Plant nutrition.0081	Phosphorus is limited in most soils because it is released very slowly from insoluble phosphates .
Plant nutrition.0082	Under most environmental conditions it is the limiting element because of its small concentration in soil and high demand by plants and microorganisms .
Plant nutrition.0083	Plants can increase phosphorus uptake by a mutualism with mycorrhiza .
Plant nutrition.0084	A Phosphorus deficiency in plants is characterized by an intense green coloration in leaves .
Plant nutrition.0085	If the plant is experiencing high phosphorus deficiencies the leaves may become denatured and show signs of necrosis .
Plant nutrition.0086	Occasionally the leaves may appear purple from an accumulation of anthocyanin .
Plant nutrition.0087	Because phosphorus is a mobile nutrient , older leaves will show the first signs of deficiency .
Plant nutrition.0088	It is useful to apply a high phosphorus content fertilizer , such as bone meal , to perennials to help with successful root formation .
Plant nutrition.0089	Potassium Potassium regulates the opening and closing of the stomata by a potassium ion pump .
Plant nutrition.0090	Since stomata are important in water regulation , potassium reduces water loss from the leaves and increases drought tolerance .
Plant nutrition.0091	Potassium deficiency may cause necrosis or interveinal chlorosis .
Plant nutrition.0092	K + is highly mobile and can aid in balancing the anion charges within the plant .
Plant nutrition.0093	It also has high solubility in water and leaches out of rocky or sandy soils .
Plant nutrition.0094	This water solubility can result in potassium deficiency .
Plant nutrition.0095	Potassium serves as an activator of enzymes used in photosynthesis and respiration Potassium is used to build cellulose and aids in photosynthesis by the formation of a chlorophyll precursor .
Plant nutrition.0096	Potassium deficiency may result in higher risk of pathogens , wilting , chlorosis , brown spotting , and higher chances of damage from frost and heat .
Plant nutrition.0097	Nitrogen Nitrogen is an essential component of all proteins .
Plant nutrition.0098	Nitrogen deficiency most often results in stunted growth , slow growth , and chlorosis .
Plant nutrition.0099	Nitrogen deficient plants will also exhibit a purple appearance on the stems , petioles and underside of leaves from an accumulation of anthocyanin pigments .
Plant nutrition.0100	Most of the nitrogen taken up by plants is from the soil in the forms of NO3 -- , although in acid environments such as boreal forests where nitrification is less likely to occur , ammonium NH4 + is more likely to be the dominating source of nitrogen .
Plant nutrition.0101	Amino acids and proteins can only be built from NH4 + so NO3 -- must be reduced .
Plant nutrition.0102	Under many agricultural settings , nitrogen is the limiting nutrient of high growth .
Plant nutrition.0103	Some plants require more nitrogen than others , such as corn -LRB- Zea mays -RRB- .
Plant nutrition.0104	Because nitrogen is mobile , the older leaves exhibit chlorosis and necrosis earlier than the younger leaves .
Plant nutrition.0105	Soluble forms of nitrogen are transported as amines and amides .
Plant nutrition.0106	Macronutrients -LRB- secondary and tertiary -RRB- Sulphur Sulphur is a structural component of some amino acids and vitamins , and is essential in the manufacturing of chloroplasts .
Plant nutrition.0107	Sulphur is also found in the Iron Sulphur complexes of the electron transport chains in photosynthesis .
Plant nutrition.0108	It is immobile and deficiency therefore affects younger tissues first .
Plant nutrition.0109	Symptoms of deficiency include yellowing of leaves and stunted growth .
Plant nutrition.0110	Calcium Calcium regulates transport of other nutrients into the plant and is also involved in the activation of certain plant enzymes .
Plant nutrition.0111	Calcium deficiency results in stunting .
Plant nutrition.0112	This nutrient is involved in photosynthesis and plant structure .
Plant nutrition.0113	Blossom end rot is also a result of inadequate calcium .
Plant nutrition.0114	Magnesium Magnesium is an important part of chlorophyll , a critical plant pigment important in photosynthesis .
Plant nutrition.0115	It is important in the production of ATP through its role as an enzyme cofactor .
Plant nutrition.0116	Magnesium deficiency can result in interveinal chlorosis .
Plant nutrition.0117	Silicon In plants , silicon strengthens cell walls , improving plant strength , health , and productivity .
Plant nutrition.0118	Other benefits of silicon to plants include improved drought and frost resistance , decreased lodging potential and boosting the plant 's natural pest and disease fighting systems .
Plant nutrition.0119	Silicon has also been shown to improve plant vigor and physiology by improving root mass and density , and increasing above ground plant biomass and crop yields .
Plant nutrition.0120	Although not considered an essential element for plant growth and development -LRB- except for specific plant species - sugarcane and members of the horsetail family -RRB- , silicon is considered a beneficial element in many countries throughout the world due to its many benefits to numerous plant species when under abiotic or biotic stresses .
Plant nutrition.0121	Silicon is currently under consideration by the Association of American Plant Food Control Officials -LRB- AAPFCO -RRB- for elevation to the status of a `` plant beneficial substance '' .
Plant nutrition.0122	Silicon is the second most abundant element in earth 's crust .
Plant nutrition.0123	Higher plants differ characteristically in their capacity to take up silicon .
Plant nutrition.0124	Depending on their SiO2 content they can be divided into three major groups : * Wetland graminae-wetland rice , horsetail -LRB- 10 -- 15 % -RRB- * Dryland graminae-sugar cane , most of the cereal species and few dicotyledons species -LRB- 1 -- 3 % -RRB- * Most of dicotyledons especially legumes -LRB- 2 + ion .
Plant nutrition.0125	Nickel is essential for activation of urease , an enzyme involved with nitrogen metabolism that is required to process urea .
Plant nutrition.0126	Without Nickel , toxic levels of urea accumulate , leading to the formation of necrotic lesions .
Plant nutrition.0127	In lower plants , Nickel activates several enzymes involved in a variety of processes , and can substitute for Zinc and Iron as a cofactor in some enzymes .
Plant nutrition.0128	Chlorine Chlorine , as compounded chloride , is necessary for osmosis and ionic balance ; it also plays a role in photosynthesis .
Plant nutrition.0129	Cobalt Cobalt has proven to be beneficial to at least some plants , but is essential in others , such as legumes where it is required for nitrogen fixation for the symbiotic relationship it has with nitrogen-fixing bacteria .
Plant nutrition.0130	Vanadium may be required by some plants , but at very low concentrations .
Plant nutrition.0131	It may also be substituting for molybdenum .
Plant nutrition.0132	Selenium and sodium may also be beneficial .
Plant nutrition.0133	Sodium can replace potassium 's regulation of stomatal opening and closing .
Plant nutrition.0134	# The requirement of Co for N2 fixation in legumes and non-legumes have been documented clearly # Protein synthesis of Rhizobium is impaired due to Co deficiency # It is still not clear whether Co has direct effect on higher plant Aluminium * Tea has a high tolerance for Al toxicity and the growth is stimulated by Al application .
Plant nutrition.0135	The possible reason is the prevention of Cu , Mn or P toxicity effects .
Plant nutrition.0136	* There have been reports that Al may serve as fungicide against certain types of root rot .
Plant nutrition.0137	=
Soil.0000	bytes = `` 153003 '' > Soil is a natural body consisting of layers -LRB- soil horizons -RRB- that are primarily composed of minerals , mixed with at least some organic matter , which differ from their parent materials in their texture , structure , consistency , color , chemical , biological and other characteristics .
Soil.0001	It is the unconsolidated or loose covering of fine rock particles that covers the surface of the earth .
Soil.0002	Soil is the end product of the influence of the climate , relief -LRB- slope -RRB- , organisms , parent materials -LRB- original minerals -RRB- , and time .
Soil.0003	In engineering terms , soil is referred to as regolith , or loose rock material that lies above the ` solid geology ' .
Soil.0004	In horticulture , the terms ` soil ' is defined as the layer that contains organic material that influences and has been influenced by plant roots and may range in depth from centimetres to many metres .
Soil.0005	Soil is composed of particles of broken rock -LRB- parent materials -RRB- which have been altered by physical , chemical and biological processes that include weathering with associated erosion .
Soil.0006	Soil is created from the alteration of parent material by the interactions between the lithosphere , hydrosphere , atmosphere , and biosphere .
Soil.0007	It can also be considered a mixture of mineral and organic materials in the form of solids , gases and liquids .
Soil.0008	Soil is commonly referred to as `` earth '' or `` dirt '' ; technically , the term `` dirt '' should be restricted to displaced soil .
Soil.0009	Soil forms a structure filled with pore spaces and can be thought of as a mixture of solids , water , and gases .
Soil.0010	Accordingly , soils are often treated as a three-state system .
Soil.0011	Most soils have a density between 1 and 2 g/cm ³ .
Soil.0012	Little of the soil of planet Earth is older than the Pleistocene and none is older than the Cenozoic , although fossilised soils are preserved from as far back as the Archean .
Soil.0013	Overview On a volume basis a good quality soil is one that is 45 % minerals -LRB- sand , silt , clay -RRB- , 25 % water , 25 % air , and 5 % organic material , both live and dead .
Soil.0014	The mineral and organic components are considered a constant while the percentages of water and air are variable where the increase in one is balanced by the reduction in the other .
Soil.0015	Given time , the simple mixture of sand , silt , and clay will evolve into a soil profile which consists of two or more layers called horizons that differ in one or more properties such as texture , structure , colour , porosity , consistency , and reaction .
Soil.0016	The horizons differ greatly in thickness and generally lack sharp boundaries .
Soil.0017	Mature soil profiles in temperate regions may include three master horizons A , B and C .
Soil.0018	The A and B horizons are called the solum or `` true soil '' as most of the chemical and biological activity that has formed soil takes place in those two profiles .
Soil.0019	The pore space of soil is shared by gases as well as water .
Soil.0020	The aeration of the soil influences the health of the soil 's flora and fauna and the movement of gases into and out of the soil .
Soil.0021	Of all the factors influencing the evolution of soil , water is the most powerful due to its involvement in the solution , erosion , transportation , and deposition of the materials of which a soil is composed .
Soil.0022	The mixture of water and dissolved and suspended materials is called the soil solution .
Soil.0023	Water is central to the solution , precipitation and leaching of minerals from the soil profile .
Soil.0024	Finally , water affects the type of vegetation that grows in a soil , which in turn affects the development of the soil profile .
Soil.0025	The most influential factor in stabilizing soil fertility are the soil colloidal particles , clay and humus , which behave as repositories of nutrients and moisture and act to buffer the variations of soil solution ions and moisture .
Soil.0026	Their contributions to soil nutrition are out of proportion to their part of the soil .
Soil.0027	Colloids act to store nutrients that might otherwise be leached from the soil or to release those ions in response changes to soil pH. The greatest influence on plant nutrition is soil pH , which is a measure of the hydrogen ion -LRB- acid-forming -RRB- soil reactivity , and is in turn a function of the soil materials , precipitation level , and plant root behavior .
Soil.0028	Soil pH strongly affects the availability of nutrients .
Soil.0029	Most nutrients , with the exception of nitrogen , originate from minerals and are stored in organic materials both live and dead and on colloidal particles .
Soil.0030	Some nitrogen originates from rain , but most of the nitrogen available in soils is the result of nitrogen fixation by bacteria .
Soil.0031	The action of microbes on organic matter and minerals may be to free nutrients for use , sequester them , or cause their loss from the soil by their volatilisation to gases or their leaching from the soil .
Soil.0032	The nutrients may be stored on soil colloids , and live or dead organic matter , but may not be accessible to plants due to extremes of pH. The organic material of the soil has a powerful effect on its development , fertility , and available moisture .
Soil.0033	Following water and soil colloids , organic material is next in importance to soil 's formation and fertility .
Soil.0034	History of the study of soil Studies concerning soil fertility The history of the study of soil is intimately tied to our urgent need to provide food for ourselves and forage for our animals .
Soil.0035	Throughout history , civilizations have prospered or declined as a function of the availability and productivity of their soils .
Soil.0036	The Greek historian Xenophon -LRB- 450 -- 355 B.C. -RRB- is credited with being the first to expound upon the merits of green-manuring crops : `` But then whatever weeds are upon the ground , being turned into earth , enrich the soil as much as dung . ''
Soil.0037	Columella 's `` Husbandry , '' circa 60 A.D. , advocated the use of lime and that clover and alfalfa -LRB- green manure -RRB- should be turned under , and was used by 15 generations -LRB- 450 years -RRB- under the Roman Empire until its collapse .
Soil.0038	From the fall of Rome to the French Revolution , knowledge of soil and agriculture was passed on from parent to child and as a result , crop yields were low .
Soil.0039	During the European Dark Ages , Yahya Ibn_al - ` Awwam 's handbook guided the people of North Africa , Spain and the Middle East with its emphasis on irrigation ; a translation of this work was finally carried to the southwest of the United States .
Soil.0040	Experiments into what made plants grow first led to the idea that the ash left behind when plant matter was burned was the essential element but overlooked the role of nitrogen , which is not left on the ground after combustion .
Soil.0041	In about 1635 , the Flemish chemist Jan Baptist van Helmont thought he had proved water to be the essential element from his famous five years ' experiment with a willow tree grown with only the addition of rainwater .
Soil.0042	His conclusion came from the fact that the increase in the plant 's weight had been produced only by the addition of water , with no reduction in the soil 's weight .
Soil.0043	John Woodward -LRB- d. 1728 -RRB- experimented with various types of water ranging from clean to muddy and found muddy water the best , and so he concluded that earthy matter was the essential element .
Soil.0044	Others concluded it was humus in the soil that passed some essence to the growing plant .
Soil.0045	Still others held that the vital growth principal was something passed from dead plants or animals to the new plants .
Soil.0046	At the start of the 18th century , Jethro Tull demonstrated that it was beneficial to cultivate the soil , but his opinion that the stirring made the fine parts of soil available for plant absorption was erroneous .
Soil.0047	As chemistry developed , it was applied to the investigation of soil fertility .
Soil.0048	The French chemist Antoine Lavoisier showed in about 1778 that plants and animals must `` combust '' oxygen internally to live and was able to deduce that most of the 165-pound weight of van Helmont 's willow tree derived from air .
Soil.0049	It was the French agriculturalist Jean-Baptiste Boussingault who by means of experimentation obtained evidence showing that the main sources of carbon , hydrogen and oxygen for plants were the air and water .
Soil.0050	Justus von Liebig in his book Organic Chemistry in its Applications to Agriculture and Physiology -LRB- published 1840 -RRB- , he asserted that the chemicals in plants must have come from the soil and air and that to maintain soil fertility , the used minerals must be replaced .
Soil.0051	Liebig nevertheless believed the nitrogen was supplied from the air .
Soil.0052	The enrichment of soil with guano by the Incas was rediscovered in 1802 , by Alexander von Humboldt .
Soil.0053	This led to its mining and that of Chilean nitrate and to its application to soil in the United States and Europe after 1840 .
Soil.0054	The work of Liebig was a revolution for agriculture , and so other investigators started experimentation based on it .
Soil.0055	In England John Bennet Lawes and Joseph Henry Gilbert worked in the Rothamsted Experimental Station , founded by the former , and discovered that plants took nitrogen from the soil , and that salts needed to be in an available state to be absorbed by plants .
Soil.0056	Their investigations also produced the `` superphosphate '' , consisting in the acid treatment of phosphate rock .
Soil.0057	This led to the invention and use of salts of potassium -LRB- K -RRB- and nitrogen -LRB- N -RRB- as fertilizers .
Soil.0058	Finally , the chemical basis of nutrients delivered to the soil in manure was understood and in the mid-19th century chemical fertilisers were applied .
Soil.0059	The dynamic interaction of soil and its life forms awaited discovery .
Soil.0060	In 1856 J. T. Way discovered that ammonia contained in fertilisers was transformed into nitrates , and twenty years later R. W. Warington proved that this transformation was done by living organisms .
Soil.0061	In 1890 Sergei Winogradsky announced he had found the bacteria responsible for this transformation .
Soil.0062	It was known that certain legumes could take up nitrogen from the air and fix it to the soil .
Soil.0063	The development of bacteriology towards the end of the 19th century led to an understanding of the role played in nitrogen fixation by bacteria .
Soil.0064	The symbiosis of bacteria and leguminous roots , and the fixation of nitrogen by the bacteria , were simultaneously discovered by German agronomist Hermann Hellriegel and Dutch microbiologist Martinus Beijerinck .
Soil.0065	Crop rotation , mechanisation , chemical and natural fertilisers led to a doubling of wheat yields in Western Europe between 1800 and 1900 .
Soil.0066	Studies concerning soil formation The scientists who studied the soil in connection with agricultural practices had considered it mainly as a static substrate .
Soil.0067	However , soil is the result of evolution from more ancient geological materials .
Soil.0068	After studies of the improvement of the soil commenced , others began to study soil genesis and as a result also soil types and classifications .
Soil.0069	In 1860 , in Mississippi , Eugene W. Hilgard studied the relationship among rock material , climate , and vegetation , and the type of soils that were developed .
Soil.0070	He realised that the soils were dynamic , and considered soil types classification .
Soil.0071	Unfortunately his work was not continued .
Soil.0072	At the same time Vasily Dokuchaev -LRB- about 1870 -RRB- was leading a team of soil scientists in Russia who conducted an extensive survey of soils , finding that similar basic rocks , climate and vegetation types lead to similar soil layering and types , and established the concepts for soil classifications .
Soil.0073	Due to the language barriers , the work of this team was not communicated to Western Europe until 1914 by a publication in German by K. D. Glinka , a member of the Russian team .
Soil.0074	Curtis F. Marbut was influenced by the work of the Russian team , translated Glinka 's publication into English , and as he was placed in charge of the U. S. National Cooperative Soil Survey , applied it to a national soil classification system .
Soil.0075	Influences on soil formation Soil formation , or pedogenesis , is the combined effect of physical , chemical , biological and anthropogenic processes on soil parent material .
Soil.0076	Soil is said to be formed when organic matter has accumulated and colloids are washed downward , leaving deposits of clay , humus , iron oxide , carbonate , and gypsum .
Soil.0077	These constituents are moved from one level to another by water and animal activity .
Soil.0078	As a result , layers -LRB- horizons -RRB- form in the soil profile .
Soil.0079	The alteration and movement of materials within a soil causes the formation of distinctive soil horizons .
Soil.0080	How soil formation proceeds is influenced by at least five classic factors that are intertwined in the evolution of a soil .
Soil.0081	They are : parent material , climate , topography -LRB- relief -RRB- , organisms , and time .
Soil.0082	When reordered to climate , relief , organisms , parent material , and time , they form the acronym CROPT .
Soil.0083	An example of the development of a soil would begin with the weathering of lava flow bedrock , which would produce the purely mineral-based parent material from which the soil texture forms .
Soil.0084	Soil development would proceed most rapidly from bare rock of recent flows in a warm climate , under heavy and frequent rainfall .
Soil.0085	Under such conditions , plants become established very quickly on basaltic lava , even though there is very little organic material .
Soil.0086	The plants are supported by the porous rock as it is filled with nutrient-bearing water that carries dissolved minerals from the rocks and guano .
Soil.0087	Crevasses and pockets , local topography of the rocks , would hold fine materials and harbour plant roots .
Soil.0088	The developing plant roots are associated with mycorrhizal fungi that assist in breaking up the porous lava , and by these means organic matter and a finer mineral soil accumulate with time .
Soil.0089	Parent material The mineral material from which a soil forms is called parent material .
Soil.0090	Rock , whether its origin is igneous , sedimentary , or metamorphic , is the source of all soil mineral materials and origin of all plant nutrients with the exceptions of nitrogen , hydrogen and carbon .
Soil.0091	As the parent material is chemically and physically weathered , transported , deposited and precipitated , it is transformed into a soil .
Soil.0092	Typical soil mineral materials are : * Quartz : SiO2 * Calcite : CaCO3 * Feldspar : KAlSi3O8 * Mica -LRB- biotite -RRB- : K -LRB- Mg , Fe -RRB- 3AlSi3O10 -LRB- OH -RRB- 2 Classification of parent material Parent materials are classified according to how they came to be deposited .
Soil.0093	Residual materials are mineral materials that have weathered in place from primary bedrock .
Soil.0094	Transported materials are those that have been deposited by water , wind , ice or gravity .
Soil.0095	And cumulose material is organic matter that has grown and accumulates in place .
Soil.0096	Residual soils are soils that develop from their underlying parent rocks and have the same general chemistry as those rocks .
Soil.0097	The soils found on mesas , plateaux , and plains are residual soils .
Soil.0098	In the United States as little as three percent of the soils are residual .
Soil.0099	Most soils derive from transported materials that have been moved many miles by wind , water , ice and gravity .
Soil.0100	* Aeolian processes -LRB- movement by wind -RRB- are capable of moving silt and fine sand many hundreds of miles , forming loess soils -LRB- 60 -- 90 percent silt -RRB- , common in the Midwest of North America and in Central Asia .
Soil.0101	Clay is seldom moved by wind as it forms stable aggregates .
Soil.0102	* Water-transported materials are classed as either alluvial , lacustrine , or marine .
Soil.0103	Alluvial materials are those moved and deposited by flowing water .
Soil.0104	Sedimentary deposits settled in lakes are called lacustrine .
Soil.0105	Lake Bonneville and many soils around the Great Lakes of the United States are examples .
Soil.0106	Marine deposits , such as soils along the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts and in the Imperial Valley of California of the United States , are the beds of ancient seas that have been revealed as the land uplifted .
Soil.0107	* Ice moves parent material and makes deposits in the form of terminal and lateral moraines in the case of stationary glaciers .
Soil.0108	Retreating glaciers leave smoother ground moraines and in all cases , outwash plains are left as alluvial deposits are moved downstream from the glacier .
Soil.0109	* Parent material moved by gravity is obvious at the base of steep slopes as talus cones and is called colluvial material .
Soil.0110	Cumulose parent material is not moved but originates from deposited organic material .
Soil.0111	This includes peat and muck soils and results from preservation of plant residues by the low oxygen content of a high water table .
Soil.0112	While peat may form sterile soils , muck soils may be very fertile .
Soil.0113	Weathering of parent material The weathering of parent material takes the form of physical disintegrating and chemical decomposition and transformation .
Soil.0114	Physical disintegration begins as rocks that have solidified deep in the earth are exposed to lower pressure near the surface and they swell and become unstable .
Soil.0115	Chemical decomposition rates double with each 10 ° C rise in temperature but is strongly dependent on water to effect chemical changes .
Soil.0116	Rocks that will decompose in a few years in tropical climates will remain unaltered for millennia in deserts .
Soil.0117	* Physical disintegration is the first stage in the transformation of parent material into soil .
Soil.0118	The freezing of absorbed water causes the physical splitting of material along a path toward the center of the rock , while temperature gradients within the rock can cause exfoliation of `` shells '' .
Soil.0119	Cycles of wetting and drying cause soil particles to be ground down to a finer size , as does the physical rubbing of material caused by wind , water , and gravity .
Soil.0120	Organisms also reduce parent material in size through the action of plant roots or digging on the part of animals .
Soil.0121	* Chemical decomposition results when minerals are made soluble by water or are changed in structure .
Soil.0122	The first three of the following list are solubility changes and the last three are structural changes .
Soil.0123	#The solution of salts in water results from the action of bipolar water on ionic salt compounds .
Soil.0124	#Hydrolysis is the transformation of minerals into polar molecules by the splitting of the mineral and the intervening water .
Soil.0125	This results in soluble acid-base pairs .
Soil.0126	For example , the hydrolysis of orthoclase-feldspar transforms it to acid silicate clay and basic potassium hydroxide , both of which are more soluble .
Soil.0127	#In carbonation , the reaction of carbon dioxide in solution with water forms carbonic acid .
Soil.0128	Carbonic acid will transform calcite into more soluble calcium bicarbonate .
Soil.0129	#Hydration is the inclusion of water in a mineral structure , causing it to swell and leaving it more stressed and easily decomposed .
Soil.0130	#Oxidation of a mineral compound causes it to swell and increase its oxidation number , leaving it more easily attacked by water or carbonic acid .
Soil.0131	#Reduction means the oxidation number of some part of the mineral is reduced , which occurs when oxygen is scarce .
Soil.0132	The reduction of minerals leaves them electrically unstable , more soluble and internally stressed and easily decomposed .
Soil.0133	Of the above , hydrolysis and carbonation are the most effective .
Soil.0134	Saprolite is a particular example of a residual soil formed from the transformation of granite , metamorphic and other types of bedrock into clay minerals .
Soil.0135	Often called `` weathered granite '' , saprolite is the result of weathering processes that include : hydrolysis , chelation from organic compounds , hydration -LRB- the solution of minerals in water with resulting cation and anion pairs -RRB- and physical processes that include freezing and thawing .
Soil.0136	The mineralogical and chemical composition of the primary bedrock material , its physical features , including grain size and degree of consolidation , and the rate and type of weathering transform the parent material into a different mineral .
Soil.0137	The texture , pH and mineral constituents of saprolite are inherited from its parent material .
Soil.0138	Climate Climate is the dominant factor in soil formation , and soils show the distinctive characteristics of the climate zones in which they form .
Soil.0139	Mineral precipitation and temperature are the primary climatic influences on soil formation .
Soil.0140	The direct influences of climate include : * A shallow accumulation of lime in low rainfall areas as caliche * Formation of acid soils in humid areas * Erosion of soils on steep hillsides * Deposition of eroded materials downstream * Very intense chemical weathering , leaching , and erosion in warm and humid regions where soil does not freeze Climate directly affects the rate of weathering and leaching .
Soil.0141	Soil is said to be formed when detectable layers of clays , organic colloids , carbonates , or soluble salts have been moved downward .
Soil.0142	Wind moves sand and smaller particles , especially in arid regions where there is little plant cover .
Soil.0143	The type and amount of precipitation influence soil formation by affecting the movement of ions and particles through the soil , and aid in the development of different soil profiles .
Soil.0144	Soil profiles are more distinct in wet and cool climates , where organic materials may accumulate , than in wet and warm climates , where organic materials are rapidly consumed .
Soil.0145	The effectiveness of water in weathering parent rock material depends on seasonal and daily temperature fluctuations .
Soil.0146	Cycles of freezing and thawing constitute an effective mechanism which breaks up rocks and other consolidated materials .
Soil.0147	Climate also indirectly influences soil formation through the effects of vegetation cover and biological activity , which modify the rates of chemical reactions in the soil .
Soil.0148	Topography The topography , or relief , characterised by the inclination of the surface , determines the rate of precipitation runoff and rate of formation or erosion of the surface soil profiles .
Soil.0149	Steep slopes allow rapid runoff and erosion of the top soil profiles and little mineral deposition in lower profiles .
Soil.0150	Depressions allow the accumulation of water , minerals and organic matter and in the extreme , the resulting soils will be saline marshes or peat bogs .
Soil.0151	Intermediate topography affords the best conditions for the formation of an agriculturally productive soil .
Soil.0152	Organisms Soil is the most abundant ecosystem on Earth , but the vast majority of organisms in soil are microbes , a great many of which have not been described .
Soil.0153	There may be a population limit of around one billion cells per gram of soil , but estimates of the number of species vary widely .
Soil.0154	One estimate put the number at over a million species per gram of soil , although a later study suggests a maximum of just over 50,000 species per gram of soil .
Soil.0155	The total number of organisms and species can vary widely according to soil type , location , and depth .
Soil.0156	Plants , animals , fungi , bacteria and humans affect soil formation -LRB- see soil biomantle and stonelayer -RRB- .
Soil.0157	Animals , soil mesofauna and micro-organisms mix soils as they form burrows and pores , allowing moisture and gases to move about .
Soil.0158	In the same way , plant roots open channels in soils .
Soil.0159	Plants with deep taproots can penetrate many metres through the different soil layers to bring up nutrients from deeper in the profile .
Soil.0160	Plants with fibrous roots that spread out near the soil surface have roots that are easily decomposed , adding organic matter .
Soil.0161	Micro-organisms , including fungi and bacteria , effect chemical exchanges between roots and soil and act as a reserve of nutrients .
Soil.0162	Humans impact soil formation by removing vegetation cover with erosion as the result .
Soil.0163	Their tillage also mixes the different soil layers , restarting the soil formation process as less weathered material is mixed with the more developed upper layers .
Soil.0164	Vegetation impacts soils in numerous ways .
Soil.0165	It can prevent erosion caused by excessive rain that results in surface runoff .
Soil.0166	Plants shade soils , keeping them cooler and slowing evaporation of soil moisture , or conversely , by way of transpiration , plants can cause soils to lose moisture .
Soil.0167	Plants can form new chemicals that can break down minerals and improve soil structure .
Soil.0168	The type and amount of vegetation depends on climate , topography , soil characteristics , and biological factors .
Soil.0169	Soil factors such as density , depth , chemistry , pH , temperature and moisture greatly affect the type of plants that can grow in a given location .
Soil.0170	Dead plants and fallen leaves and stems begin their decomposition on the surface .
Soil.0171	There , organisms feed on them and mix the organic material with the upper soil layers ; these added organic compounds become part of the soil formation process .
Soil.0172	Time Time is a factor in the interactions of all the above .
Soil.0173	Over time , soils evolve features that are dependent on the interplay of other soil forming factors .
Soil.0174	Soil is always changing .
Soil.0175	It takes about 800 to 1000 years for a thick layer of fertile soil to be formed in nature .
Soil.0176	For example , recently deposited material from a flood exhibits no soil development because there has not been enough time for the material to form a structure that further defines soil .
Soil.0177	The original soil surface is buried , and the formation process must begin anew for this deposit .
Soil.0178	Over a period of between hundreds and thousands of years , the soil will develop a profile that depends on the intensities of biota and climate .
Soil.0179	While soil can achieve relative stability of its properties for extended periods , the soil life cycle ultimately ends in soil conditions that leave it vulnerable to erosion .
Soil.0180	Despite the inevitability of soil retrogression and degradation , most soil cycles are long .
Soil.0181	Soil-forming factors continue to affect soils during their existence , even on `` stable '' landscapes that are long-enduring , some for millions of years .
Soil.0182	Materials are deposited on top or are blown or washed from the surface .
Soil.0183	With additions , removals and alterations , soils are always subject to new conditions .
Soil.0184	Whether these are slow or rapid changes depends on climate , topography and biological activity .
Soil.0185	Physical properties of soils The physical properties of soils , in order of decreasing importance , are texture , structure , density , porosity , consistency , temperature , colour and resistivity .
Soil.0186	Most of these determine the aeration of the soil and the ability of water to infiltrate and to be held in the soil .
Soil.0187	Soil texture is determined by the relative proportion of the three kinds of soil particles , called soil `` separates '' : sand , silt , and clay .
Soil.0188	Larger soil structures called `` peds '' are created from the separates when iron oxides , carbonates , clay , and silica with the organic constituent humus , coat particles and cause them to adhere into larger , relatively stable secondary structures .
Soil.0189	Soil density , particularly bulk density , is a measure of soil compaction .
Soil.0190	Soil porosity consists of the part of the soil volume occupied by air and water .
Soil.0191	Soil consistency is the ability of soil to stick together .
Soil.0192	Soil temperature and colour are self-defining .
Soil.0193	Resistivity refers to the resistance to conduction of electric currents and affects the rate of corrosion of metal and concrete structures .
Soil.0194	The properties may vary through the depth of a soil profile .
Soil.0195	Texture The mineral components of soil , sand , silt and clay , determine a soil 's texture .
Soil.0196	In the illustrated USDA textural classification triangle , the only soil that does not exhibit one of these predominately is called `` loam '' .
Soil.0197	While even pure sand , silt or clay may be considered a soil , from the perspective of food production a loam soil with a small amount of organic material is considered ideal .
Soil.0198	The mineral constituents of a loam soil might be 40 % sand , 40 % silt and the balance 20 % clay by weight .
Soil.0199	Soil texture affects soil behaviour , in particular its retention capacity for nutrients and water .
Soil.0200	Sand and silt are the products of physical and chemical weathering ; clay , on the other hand , is a product of chemical weathering but often forms as a secondary mineral precipitated from dissolved minerals .
Soil.0201	It is the specific surface area of soil particles and the unbalanced ionic charges within them that determine their role in the cation exchange capacity of soil , and hence its fertility .
Soil.0202	Sand is least active , followed by silt ; clay is the most active .
Soil.0203	Sand 's greatest benefit to soil is that it resists compaction and increases porosity .
Soil.0204	Silt is mineralogically like sand but with its higher specific surface area it is more chemically active than sand .
Soil.0205	But it is the clay content , with its very high specific surface area and generally large number of negative charges , that gives a soil its high retention capacity for water and nutrients .
Soil.0206	Clay soils also resist wind and water erosion better than silty and sandy soils , as the particles are bonded to each other .
Soil.0207	Sand is the most stable of the mineral components of soil ; it consists of rock fragments , primarily quartz particles , ranging in size from in diameter .
Soil.0208	Silt ranges in size from 0.05 to 0.002 mm -LRB- 0.002 to 0.00008 in -RRB- .
Soil.0209	Clay can not be resolved by optical microscopes as its particles are or less in diameter .
Soil.0210	In medium-textured soils , clay is often washed downward through the soil profile and accumulates in the subsoil .
Soil.0211	Soil components larger than are classed as rock and gravel and are removed before determining the percentages of the remaining components and the texture class of the soil , but are included in the name .
Soil.0212	For example , a sandy loam soil with 20 % gravel would be called gravelly sandy loam .
Soil.0213	When the organic component of a soil is substantial , the soil is called organic soil rather than mineral soil .
Soil.0214	A soil is called organic if : #Mineral fraction is 0 % clay and organic matter is 20 % or more #Mineral fraction is 0 % to 50 % clay and organic matter is between 20 % and 30 % #Mineral fraction is 50 % or more clay and organic matter 30 % or more .
Soil.0215	Structure The clumping of the soil textural components of sand , silt and clay forms aggregates and the further association of those aggregates into larger units forms soil structures called peds .
Soil.0216	The adhesion of the soil textural components by organic substances , iron oxides , carbonates , clays , and silica , and the breakage of those aggregates due to expansion-contraction , freezing-thawing , and wetting-drying cycles , shape soil into distinct geometric forms .
Soil.0217	These peds evolve into units which may have various shapes , sizes and degrees of development .
Soil.0218	A soil clod , however , is not a ped but rather a mass of soil that results from mechanical disturbance .
Soil.0219	The soil structure affects aeration , water movement , conduction of heat , plant root growth and resistance to erosion .
Soil.0220	Water has the strongest effect on soil structure due to its solution and precipitation of minerals and its effect on plant growth .
Soil.0221	Soil structure often gives clues to its texture , organic matter content , biological activity , past soil evolution , human use , and the chemical and mineralogical conditions under which the soil formed .
Soil.0222	While texture is defined by the mineral component of a soil and is an innate property of the soil that does not change with agricultural activities , soil structure can be improved or destroyed by the choice and timing of farming practices .
Soil.0223	Soil Structural Classes : 1 .
Soil.0224	Types : Shape and arrangement of peds : a. Platy : Peds are flattened one atop the other 1-10 mm thick .
Soil.0225	: : Found in the A-horizon of forest soils and lake sedimentation .
Soil.0226	: b. Prismatic and Columnar : Prismlike peds are long in the : : vertical dimension , 10-100 mm wide .
Soil.0227	Prismatic peds have flat : : tops , columnar peds have rounded tops .
Soil.0228	Tend to form in the B - : : horizon in high sodium soil where clay has accumulated .
Soil.0229	: c. Angular and subangular : Blocky peds are imperfect cubes , : :5 -50 mm , angular have sharp edges , subangular have rounded : : edges .
Soil.0230	Tend to form in the B-horizon where clay has : : accumulated and indicate poor water penetration .
Soil.0231	:d .
Soil.0232	Granular and Crumb : Spheroid peds of polyhedrons , 1-10 mm , : : often found in the A-horizon in the presence of organic : : material .
Soil.0233	Crumb peds are more porous and are considered ideal .
Soil.0234	2 .
Soil.0235	Classes : Size of peds whose ranges depend upon the above type : a. Very fine or very thin : 10 mm platy , granular ; > 50 mm : : blocky ; > 100 mm prismlike .
Soil.0236	3 .
Soil.0237	Grades : Is a measure of the degree of development or cementation within the : peds that results in their strength and stability .
Soil.0238	: a. Weak : Weak cementation allows peds to fall apart into the : : three textural constituents , sand , silt and clay .
Soil.0239	: b. Moderate : Peds are not distinct in undisturbed soil but when : : removed they break into aggregates , some broken aggregates and : : little unaggregated material .
Soil.0240	This is considered ideal .
Soil.0241	: c. Strong : Peds are distinct before removed from the profile and : : do not break apart easily .
Soil.0242	:d .
Soil.0243	Structureless : Soil is entirely cemented together in one : : great mass such as slabs of clay or no cementation at all such : : as with sand .
Soil.0244	At the largest scale , the forces that shape a soil 's structure result from swelling and shrinkage that initially tend to act horizontally , causing vertically oriented prismatic peds .
Soil.0245	Clayey soil , due to its differential drying rate with respect to the surface , will induce horizontal cracks , reducing columns to blocky peds .
Soil.0246	Roots , rodents , worms , and freezing-thawing cycles further break the peds into a spherical shape .
Soil.0247	At a smaller scale , plant roots extend into voids and remove water and cause the open spaces to increase , and further decrease physical aggregation size .
Soil.0248	At the same time roots , fungal hyphae and earthworms create microscopic tunnels that break up peds .
Soil.0249	At an even smaller scale , soil aggregation continues as bacteria and fungi exude sticky polysaccharides which bind soil into small peds .
Soil.0250	The addition of the raw organic matter that bacteria and fungi feed upon encourages the formation of this desirable soil structure .
Soil.0251	At the lowest scale , the soil chemistry affects the aggregation or dispersal of soil particles .
Soil.0252	The clay particles contain polyvalent cations which give the faces of clay layers a net negative charge .
Soil.0253	At the same time the edges of the clay plates have a slight positive charge , thereby allowing the edges to adhere to the faces of other clay particles or to flocculate .
Soil.0254	On the other hand , when monovalent ions such as sodium invade and displace the polyvalent cations , they weaken the positive charges on the edges , while the negative surface charges are relatively strengthened .
Soil.0255	This leaves a net negative charge on the clay , causing the particles to push apart , and so prevents the flocculation of clay particles into larger assemblages .
Soil.0256	As a result , the clay disperses and settles into voids between peds , causing them to close .
Soil.0257	In this way the soil aggregation is destroyed and the soil made impenetrable to air and water .
Soil.0258	Such sodic soil tends to form columnar structures near the surface .
Soil.0259	Density Density is the weight per unit volume of an object .
Soil.0260	Particle density is the density of only the mineral particles that make up a soil ; i.e. , it excludes pore space and organic material .
Soil.0261	Particle density averages approximately 2.65 g/cc -LRB- 165 lbm/ft3 -RRB- .
Soil.0262	Soil bulk density , a dry weight , includes air space and organic materials of the soil volume .
Soil.0263	A high bulk density indicates either compaction of the soil or high sand content .
Soil.0264	The bulk density of cultivated loam is about 1.1 to 1.4 g/cc -LRB- for comparison water is 1.0 g/cc -RRB- .
Soil.0265	A lower bulk density by itself does not indicate suitability for plant growth due to the influence of soil texture and structure .
Soil.0266	Porosity Pore space is that part of the bulk volume that is not occupied by either mineral or organic matter but is open space occupied by either air or water .
Soil.0267	Ideally , the total pore space should be 50 % of the soil volume .
Soil.0268	The air space is needed to supply oxygen to organisms decomposing organic matter , humus , and plant roots .
Soil.0269	Pore space also allows the movement and storage of water and dissolved nutrients .
Soil.0270	There are four categories of pores : #Very fine pores : 5 pascal -RRB- which is just a little less than one-atmosphere pressure .
Soil.0271	Alternatively , the terms `` tension '' or `` moisture potential '' may be used .
Soil.0272	Moisture classification The forces with which water is held in soils determine its availability to plants .
Soil.0273	Forces of adhesion hold water strongly to mineral and humus surfaces and less strongly to itself by cohesive forces .
Soil.0274	A plant 's root may penetrate a very small volume of water that is adhering to soil and be initially able to draw in water that is only lightly held by the cohesive forces .
Soil.0275	But as the droplet is drawn down , the forces of adhesion of the water for the soil particles make reducing the volume of water increasingly difficult until the plant can not produce sufficient suction to use the remaining water .
Soil.0276	The remaining water is considered unavailable .
Soil.0277	The amount of available water depends upon the soil texture and humus amounts and the type of plant attempting to use the water .
Soil.0278	Cacti , for example , can produce greater suction than can agricultural crop plants .
Soil.0279	The following description applies to a loam soil and agricultural crops .
Soil.0280	When a field is flooded , it is said to be saturated and all available air space is occupied by water .
Soil.0281	The suction required to draw water into a plant root is zero .
Soil.0282	As the field drains under the influence of gravity -LRB- drained water is called gravitational water or drain-able water -RRB- , the suction a plant must produce to use such water increases to 1/3 bar .
Soil.0283	At that point , the soil is said to have reached field capacity , and plants that use the water must produce increasingly higher suction , finally up to 15 bar .
Soil.0284	At 15 bar suction , the soil water amount is called wilting percent .
Soil.0285	At that suction the plant can not sustain its water needs as water is still being lost from the plant by transpiration ; the plant 's turgidity is lost , and it wilts .
Soil.0286	The next level , called air-dry , occurs at 1000 bar suction .
Soil.0287	Finally the oven dry condition is reached at 10,000 bar suction .
Soil.0288	All water below wilting percentage is called unavailable water .
Soil.0289	Soil moisture content The amount of water remaining in a soil drained to field capacity and the amount that is available are functions of the soil type .
Soil.0290	Sandy soil will retain very little water , while clay will hold the maximum amount .
Soil.0291	The time required to drain a field from flooded condition for a clay loam that begins at 43 % water by weight to a field capacity of 21.5 % is six days , whereas a sand loam that is flooded to its maximum of 22 % water will take two days to reach field capacity of 11.3 % water .
Soil.0292	The available water for the clay loam might be 11.3 % whereas for the sand loam it might be only 7.9 % by weight .
Soil.0293	The above are average values for the soil textures as the percentage of sand , silt and clay vary within the listed soil textures .
Soil.0294	Water flow in soils Water moves through soil due to the force of gravity , osmosis and capillarity .
Soil.0295	At zero to one-third bar suction , water moves through soil due to gravity ; this is called saturated flow .
Soil.0296	At higher suction , water movement is called unsaturated flow .
Soil.0297	Water infiltration into soil is controlled by six factors : # Soil texture # Soil structure .
Soil.0298	Fine-textured soils with granular structure are most favourable to infiltration of water .
Soil.0299	# The amount of organic matter .
Soil.0300	Coarse matter is best and if on the surface helps prevent the destruction of soil structure and the creation of crusts .
Soil.0301	# Depth of soil to impervious layers such as hardpans or bedrock # The amount of water already in the soil # Soil temperature .
Soil.0302	Warm soils take in water faster while frozen soils may not be able to absorb depending on the type of freezing .
Soil.0303	Water infiltration rates range from per hour for high clay soils to per hour for sand and well stabilised and aggregated soil structures .
Soil.0304	Water flows through the ground unevenly , called `` gravity fingers '' , because of the surface tension between water particles .
Soil.0305	Tree roots create paths for rainwater flow through soil by breaking though soil including clay layers : one study showed roots increasing infiltration of water by 153 % and another study showed an increase by 27 times .
Soil.0306	Flooding temporarily increases soil permeability in river beds , helping recharge aquifers .
Soil.0307	Saturated flow Once soil is completely wetted , any more water will move downward , or percolate , carrying with it clay , humus and nutrients , primarily cations , out of the range of plant roots and result in acid soil conditions .
Soil.0308	In order of decreasing solubility , the leached nutrients are : * Calcium * Magnesium , Sulfur , Potassium ; depending upon soil composition * Nitrogen ; usually little , unless nitrate fertiliser was applied recently * Phosphorus ; very little as its forms in soil are of low solubility .
Soil.0309	In the United States percolation water due to rainfall ranges from zero inches just east of the Rocky Mountains to twenty or more inches in the Appalachian Mountains and the north coast of the Gulf of Mexico .
Soil.0310	Unsaturated flow At suctions less than one-third bar , water moves in all directions via unsaturated flow at a rate that is dependent on the square of the diameter of the water-filled pores .
Soil.0311	Water is pushed by pressure gradients from the point of its application where it is saturated locally , and pulled by capillary action due to adhesion force of water to the soil solids , producing a suction gradient from wet towards drier soil .
Soil.0312	Doubling the diameter of the pores increases the flow rate by a factor of four .
Soil.0313	Large pores drained by gravity and not filled with water do not greatly increase the flow rate for unsaturated flow .
Soil.0314	Water flow is primarily from coarse-textured soil into fine-textured soil and is slowest in fine-textured soils such as clay .
Soil.0315	Water uptake by plants Of equal importance to the storage and movement of water in soil is the means by which plants acquire it and their nutrients .
Soil.0316	Ninety percent of water is taken up by plants as passive absorption caused by the pulling force of water evaporating -LRB- transpiring -RRB- from the long column of water that leads from the plant 's roots to its leaves .
Soil.0317	In addition , the high concentration of salts within plant roots creates an osmotic pressure gradient that pushes soil water into the roots .
Soil.0318	Osmotic absorption becomes more important during times of low water transpiration caused by lower temperatures -LRB- for example at night -RRB- or high humidity .
Soil.0319	It is the process that causes guttation .
Soil.0320	Root extension is vital for plant survival .
Soil.0321	A study of a single winter rye plant grown for four months in one cubic foot of loam soil showed that the plant developed 13,800,000 roots a total of 385 miles in length and 2,550 square feet in surface area and 14 billion hair roots of 6,600 miles total length and 4,320 square feet total area , for a total surface area of 6,870 square feet -LRB- 83 ft squared -RRB- .
Soil.0322	The total surface area of the loam soil was estimated to be 560,000 square feet .
Soil.0323	In other words the roots were in contact with only 1.2 % of the soil .
Soil.0324	Roots must seek out water as the unsaturated flow of water in soil can move only at a rate of up to per day ; as a result they are constantly dying and growing as they seek out high concentrations of soil moisture .
Soil.0325	Insufficient soil moisture to the point of wilting will cause permanent damage and crop yields will suffer .
Soil.0326	When grain sorghum was exposed to soil suction as low as 13.0 bar during the seed head emergence through bloom and seed set stages of growth , its production was reduced by 34 % .
Soil.0327	Consumptive use and water efficiency Only a small fraction -LRB- 0.1 % to 1 % -RRB- of the water used by a plant is held within the plant .
Soil.0328	The majority is ultimately lost via transpiration , while evaporation from the soil surface is also substantial .
Soil.0329	Transpiration plus evaporative soil moisture loss is called evapotranspiration .
Soil.0330	Evapotranspiration plus water held in the plant totals consumptive use , which is nearly identical to evapotranspiration .
Soil.0331	The total water used in an agricultural field includes runoff , drainage and consumptive use .
Soil.0332	The use of loose mulches will reduce evaporative losses for a period after a field is irrigated , but in the end the total evaporative loss will approach that of an uncovered soil .
Soil.0333	The benefit from mulch is to keep the moisture available during the seedling stage .
Soil.0334	Water use efficiency is measured by transpiration ratio , which is the ratio of the total water transpired by a plant to the dry weight of the harvested plant .
Soil.0335	Transpiration ratios for crops range from 300 to 700 .
Soil.0336	For example alfalfa may have a transpiration ratio of 500 and as a result 500 kilograms of water will produce one kilogram of dry alfalfa .
Soil.0337	Soil atmosphere The atmosphere of soil is radically different from the atmosphere above .
Soil.0338	The consumption of oxygen , by microbes and plant roots and their release of carbon dioxide , decrease oxygen and increase carbon dioxide concentration .
Soil.0339	Atmospheric CO2 concentration is 0.03 % , but in the soil pore space it may range from 10 to 100 times that level .
Soil.0340	At extreme levels CO2 is toxic .
Soil.0341	In addition , the soil voids are saturated with water vapour .
Soil.0342	Adequate porosity is necessary not just to allow the penetration of water but also to allow gases to diffuse in and out .
Soil.0343	Movement of gases is by diffusion from high concentrations to lower .
Soil.0344	Oxygen diffuses in and is consumed and excess levels of carbon dioxide , diffuse out with other gases as well as water .
Soil.0345	Soil texture and structure strongly affect soil porosity and gas diffusion .
Soil.0346	Platy and compacted soils impede gas flow , and a deficiency of oxygen may encourage anaerobic bacteria to reduce nitrate to the gases N2 , N2O , and NO , which are then lost to the atmosphere .
Soil.0347	Aerated soil is also a net sink of methane CH4 but a net producer of greenhouse gases when soils are depleted of oxygen and subject to elevated temperatures .
Soil.0348	Chemical and colloidal properties The chemistry of soil determines the availability of nutrients , the health of microbial populations , and its physical properties .
Soil.0349	In addition , soil chemistry also determines its corrosivity , stability , and ability to absorb pollutants and to filter water .
Soil.0350	It is the surface chemistry of clays and humus colloids that determines soil 's chemical properties .
Soil.0351	The very high specific surface area of colloids and their net negative charges , gives soil its great ability to hold and release cations in what is referred to as cation exchange .
Soil.0352	Cation-exchange capacity -LRB- CEC -RRB- is the amount of exchangeable cations per unit weight of dry soil and is expressed in terms of milliequivalents of hydrogen ion per 100 grams of soil .
Soil.0353	`` A colloid is a small , insoluble , nondiffusible particle larger than a molecule but small enough to remain suspended in a fluid medium without settling .
Soil.0354	Most soils contain organic colloidal particles as well as the inorganic colloidal particles of clays . ''
Soil.0355	Soil clays Due to its high specific surface area and its unbalanced negative charges , clay is the most active mineral component of soil .
Soil.0356	It is a colloidal and most often a crystalline material .
Soil.0357	In soils , clay is defined in a physical sense as any mineral particle less than two microns -LRB- 2x10 − 6 inches -RRB- in effective diameter .
Soil.0358	Chemically , clay is a range of minerals with certain reactive properties .
Soil.0359	Clay is also a soil textural class .
Soil.0360	Many soil minerals , such as gypsum , carbonates , or quartz , are small enough to be classified physically as clay but chemically do not afford the same utility as do clay minerals .
Soil.0361	Clay was once thought to be very small particles of quartz , feldspar , mica , hornblende or augite , but it is now known to be -LRB- with the exception of mica-based clays -RRB- a precipitate with a mineralogical composition that is dependent on but different from its parent materials and is classed as a secondary mineral .
Soil.0362	The type of clay that is formed is a function of the parent material and the composition of the minerals in solution .
Soil.0363	Mica-based clays result from a modification of the primary mica mineral in such a way that it behaves and is classed as a clay .
Soil.0364	Most clays are crystalline , but some are amorphous .
Soil.0365	The clays of a soil are a mixture of the various types of clay , but one type predominates .
Soil.0366	Most clays are crystalline and most are made up of three or four planes of oxygen held together by planes of aluminium and silicon by way of ionic bonds that together form a single layer of clay .
Soil.0367	The spatial arrangement of the oxygen atoms determines clay 's structure .
Soil.0368	Half of the weight of clay is oxygen , but on a volume basis oxygen is ninety percent .
Soil.0369	The layers of clay are sometimes held together through hydrogen bonds or potassium bridges and as a result swell less in the presence of water .
Soil.0370	Other clays , such as montmorillonite , have layers that are loosely attached and will swell greatly when water intervenes .
Soil.0371	There are three groups of clays : # Crystalline alumino-silica clays : montmorillonite , illite , vermiculite , chlorite , kaolinite .
Soil.0372	# Amorphous clays : young mixtures of silica -LRB- SiO2-OH -RRB- and alumina -LRB- Al -LRB- OH -RRB- 3 -RRB- which have not had time to form regular crystals .
Soil.0373	# Sesquioxide clays : old , highly leached clays which result in oxides of iron , aluminium and titanium .
Soil.0374	Silica clays Alumino-silica clays are characterised by their regular crystalline structure .
Soil.0375	Oxygen in ionic bonds with silicon forms a tetrahedral coordination which in turn forms sheets of silica .
Soil.0376	Two sheets of silica are bonded together by a plane of aluminium which forms an octahedral coordination , called alumina , with the oxygens of the silica sheet above and that below it .
Soil.0377	Hydroxyl ions -LRB- OH - -RRB- sometimes substitute for oxygen .
Soil.0378	As much as one fourth of the aluminium Al3 + may be substituted by Zn2 + , Mg2 + or Fe2 + , and Si4 + may be substituted by Al3 + .
Soil.0379	The substitution of lower-valence cations for higher-valence cations -LRB- isomorphic substitution -RRB- gives clay a net negative charge that attracts and holds soil solution cations , some of which are of value for plant growth .
Soil.0380	Isomorphic substitution occurs during the clay 's formation and does not change with time .
Soil.0381	* Montmorillonite clay is made of four planes of oxygen with two silicon and one central aluminium plane intervening .
Soil.0382	The alumino-silicate montmorillonite clay is said to have a 2:1 ratio of silicon to aluminium .
Soil.0383	The seven planes together form a single layer of montmorillonite .
Soil.0384	The layers are weakly held together and water may intervene , causing the clay to swell up to ten times its dry volume .
Soil.0385	It occurs in soils which have had little leaching , hence it is found in arid regions .
Soil.0386	The entire surface is exposed and available for surface reactions and it has a high cation exchange capacity -LRB- CEC -RRB- .
Soil.0387	* Illite is a 2:1 clay similar in structure to montmorillonite but has potassium bridges between the clay layers and the degree of swelling depends on the degree of weathering of the potassium .
Soil.0388	The active surface area is reduced due to the potassium bonds .
Soil.0389	Illite originates from the modification of mica , a primary mineral .
Soil.0390	It is often found together with montmorillonite and its primary minerals .
Soil.0391	It has moderate CEC .
Soil.0392	* Vermiculite is a mica-based clay similar to illite , but the layers of clay are held together more loosely by hydrated magnesium and it will swell , but not as much as does montmorillonite .
Soil.0393	It has very high CEC .
Soil.0394	* Chlorite is similar to vermiculite , but the loose bonding by occasional hydrated magnesium is replaced by a hydrated magnesium sheet , firmly bonding the planes above and below it .
Soil.0395	It has two planes of silicon , one of aluminium and one of magnesium ; hence it is a 2:2 clay .
Soil.0396	Chlorite does not swell and it has low CEC .
Soil.0397	* Kaolinite is very common , more common than montmorillonite in acid soils .
Soil.0398	It has one silica and one alumina sheet per layer ; hence it is a 1:1 type clay .
Soil.0399	One layer of oxygen is replaced with hydroxyls , which produces strong hydrogen bonds to the oxygen in the next layer of clay .
Soil.0400	As a result kaolinite does not swell in water and has a low specific surface area , and as almost no isomorphic substitution has occurred it has a low CEC .
Soil.0401	Where rainfall is high , acid soils selectively leach more silica than alumina from the original clays , leaving kaolinite .
Soil.0402	Even heavier weathering results in sesquioxide clays .
Soil.0403	Amorphous clays Amorphous clays are young , and commonly found in volcanic ash .
Soil.0404	They are mixtures of alumina and silica which have not formed the ordered crystal shape of alumino-silica clays which time would provide .
Soil.0405	The majority of their negative charges originates from hydroxyl ions , which can gain or lose a hydrogen ion -LRB- H + -RRB- in response to soil pH , and hence buffer the soil pH. They may have either a negative charge provided by the attached hydroxyl ion -LRB- OH - -RRB- , which can attract a cation , or lose the hydrogen of the hydroxyl to solution and display a positive charge which can attract anions .
Soil.0406	As a result they may display either high CEC , in an acid soil solution , or high anion exchange capacity , in a basic soil solution .
Soil.0407	Sesquioxide clays Sesquioxide clays are a product of heavy rainfall that has leached most of the silica and alumina from alumino-silica clay , leaving the less soluble oxides of iron Fe2O3 and iron hydroxide -LRB- Fe -LRB- OH -RRB- 3 -RRB- and aluminium hydroxides -LRB- Al -LRB- OH -RRB- 3 -RRB- .
Soil.0408	It takes hundreds of thousands of years of leaching to create sesquioxide clays .
Soil.0409	Sesqui is Latin for `` one and one-half '' : there are three parts oxygen to two parts iron or aluminium ; hence the ratio is one and one-half .
Soil.0410	They are hydrated and act as either amorphous or crystalline .
Soil.0411	They are not sticky and do not swell , and soils high in them behave much like sand and can rapidly pass water .
Soil.0412	They are able to hold large quantities of phosphates .
Soil.0413	Sesquioxides have low CEC .
Soil.0414	Such soils range from yellow to red in color .
Soil.0415	Such clays tend to hold phosphorus tightly rendering them unavailable for absorption by plants .
Soil.0416	Organic colloids Humus is the penultimate state of decomposition of organic matter ; while it may linger for a thousand years , on the larger scale of the age of the other soil components , it is temporary .
Soil.0417	It is composed of the very stable lignins -LRB- 30 % -RRB- and complex sugars -LRB- polyuronides , 30 % -RRB- .
Soil.0418	Its chemical assay is 60 % carbon , 5 % nitrogen , some oxygen and the remainder hydrogen , sulfur , and phosphorus .
Soil.0419	On a dry weight basis , the CEC of humus is many times greater than that of clay .
Soil.0420	Plant roots also have cation exchange sites .
Soil.0421	Carbon and terra preta In the extreme environment of heavy rain and high temperatures of tropical rain forests , the clay and organic colloids are largely destroyed .
Soil.0422	The heavy rain washes the alumino-silicate clays from the soil leaving only sesquioxide clays of low CEC .
Soil.0423	The high temperatures and humidity allow bacteria and fungi to virtually dissolve any organic matter on the rain-forest floor overnight and much of the nutrients are volatilized or leached from the soil and lost .
Soil.0424	Carbon , however , is far more stable than soil colloids and is capable of performing many of the functions of the soil colloids of sub-tropical soils .
Soil.0425	Research into terra-preta is still young but is promising .
Soil.0426	Fallow periods `` on the Amazonian Dark Earths can be as short as 6 months , whereas fallow periods on Oxisols are usually 8 to 10 years long '' Cation and anion exchange Cation exchange , between colloids and soil water , buffers -LRB- moderates -RRB- soil pH , alters soil structure , and purifies percolating water by adsorbing cations of all types , both useful and harmful .
Soil.0427	The negative charges on a colloid particle make it able to hold cations to its surface .
Soil.0428	The charges result from four sources .
Soil.0429	#Isomorphous substitution occurs in clay when lower-valence cations substitute for higher-valence cations in the crystal structure .
Soil.0430	Substitutions in the outermost layers are more effective than for the innermost layers , as the charge strength drops off as the square of the distance .
Soil.0431	The net result is a negative charge .
Soil.0432	#Edge - of-clay oxygen atoms are not in balance ionically as the tetrahedral and octahedral structures are incomplete at the edges of clay .
Soil.0433	#Hydrogens of the clay hydroxyls may be ionised into solution , leaving an oxygen with a negative charge .
Soil.0434	#Hydrogens of humus hydroxyl groups may be ionised into solution , leaving an oxygen with a negative charge .
Soil.0435	Cations held to the negatively charged colloids resist being washed downward by water and out of reach of plants ' roots , thereby preserving the fertility of soils in areas of moderate rainfall and low temperatures .
Soil.0436	There is a hierarchy in the process of cation exchange on colloids , as they differ in the strength of adsorption and their ability to replace one another .
Soil.0437	If present in equal amounts : Al3 + replaces H + replaces Ca2 + replaces Mg2 + replaces K + same as NH4 + replaces Na + If one cation is added in large amounts , it may replace the others by the sheer force of its numbers -LRB- mass action -RRB- .
Soil.0438	This is largely what occurs with the addition of fertiliser .
Soil.0439	As the soil solution becomes more acidic -LRB- an abundance of H + -RRB- , the other cations bound to colloids are pushed into solution .
Soil.0440	This is caused by the ionisation of hydroxyl groups on the surface of soil colloids in what is described as pH-dependent charges .
Soil.0441	Unlike permanent charges developed by isomorphous substitution , pH-dependent charges are variable and increase with increasing pH. As a result , those cations can be made available to plants but are also able to be leached from the soil , possibly making the soil less fertile .
Soil.0442	Plants will excrete H + into the soil and by that means , push cations off the colloids , thus making those cations absorbable by the plant .
Soil.0443	Cation exchange capacity -LRB- CEC -RRB- Cation exchange capacity should be thought of as the soil 's ability to remove cations from the soil water solution and sequester those to be exchanged later as the plant roots release hydrogen ions to the solution .
Soil.0444	CEC is the amount of exchangeable hydrogen cation -LRB- H + -RRB- that will combine with 100 grams dry weight of soil and whose measure is one milliequivalents per 100 grams of soil -LRB- 1 meq/100 g -RRB- .
Soil.0445	Hydrogen ions have a single charge and one-thousandth of a gram of hydrogen ions per 100 grams dry soil gives a measure of one milliequivalent of hydrogen ion .
Soil.0446	Calcium , with an atomic weight 40 times that of hydrogen and with a valence of two , converts to -LRB- 40/2 -RRB- x 1 milliequivalent = 20 milliequivalents of hydrogen ion per 100 grams of dry soil or 20 meq/100 g .
Soil.0447	The modern measure of CEC is expressed as centimoles of positive charge per kilogram -LRB- cmol/kg -RRB- of oven-dry soil .
Soil.0448	Most of the soil 's CEC occurs on clay and humus colloids , and the lack of those in hot , humid , wet climates , due to leaching and decomposition respectively , explains the relative sterility of tropical soils .
Soil.0449	Anion exchange capacity -LRB- AEC -RRB- Anion exchange capacity should be thought of as the soil 's ability to remove anions from the soil water solution and sequester those for later exchange as the plant roots release carbonate anions to the soil water solution .
Soil.0450	Those colloids which have low CEC tend to have some AEC .
Soil.0451	Amorphous and sesquioxide clays have the highest AEC , followed by the iron oxides .
Soil.0452	Levels of AEC are much lower than for CEC .
Soil.0453	Phosphates tend to be held at anion exchange sites .
Soil.0454	Iron and aluminum hydroxide clays are able to exchange their hydroxide anions -LRB- OH - -RRB- for other anions .
Soil.0455	The order reflecting the strength of anion adhesion is as follows : H2PO4 - replaces SO42 - replaces NO3 - replaces Cl - The amount of exchangeable anions is of a magnitude of tenths to a few milliequivalents per 100 g dry soil .
Soil.0456	As pH rises , there are relatively more hydroxyls , which will displace anions from the colloids and force them into solution and out of storage ; hence AEC decreases with increasing pH -LRB- alkalinity -RRB- .
Soil.0457	Soil reaction -LRB- pH -RRB- Soil reactivity is expressed in terms of pH and is a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of the soil .
Soil.0458	More precisely , it is a measure of hydrogen ion concentration in an aqueous solution and ranges in values from 0 to 14 -LRB- acidic to basic -RRB- but practically speaking for soils , pH ranges from 3.5 to 9.5 , as pH values beyond those extremes are toxic to life forms .
Soil.0459	Soil pH At 25 ° C an aqueous solution that has a pH of 3.5 has 10-3 .5 moles H + -LRB- hydrogen ions -RRB- per litre of solution -LRB- and also 10-10 .5 mole/litre OH - -RRB- .
Soil.0460	A pH of 7 , defined as neutral , has 10 − 7 moles hydrogen ions per litre of solution and also 10 − 7 moles of OH - per litre ; since the two concentrations are equal , they are said to neutralise each other .
Soil.0461	A pH of 9.5 is 10-9 .5 moles hydrogen ions per litre of solution -LRB- and also 10-2 .5 mole per litre OH - -RRB- .
Soil.0462	A pH of 3.5 has one million times more hydrogen ions per litre than a solution with pH of 9.5 -LRB- 9.5 - 3.5 = 6 or 106 -RRB- and is more acidic .
Soil.0463	The effect of pH on a soil is to remove from the soil or to make available certain ions .
Soil.0464	Soils with high acidity tend to have toxic amounts of aluminium and manganese .
Soil.0465	Plants which need calcium need moderate alkalinity , but most minerals are more soluble in acid soils .
Soil.0466	Soil organisms are hindered by high acidity , and most agricultural crops do best with mineral soils of pH 6.5 and organic soils of pH 5.5 .
Soil.0467	In high rainfall areas , soils tend to acidity as the basic cations are forced off the soil colloids by the mass action of hydrogen ions from the rain as those attach to the colloids .
Soil.0468	High rainfall rates can then wash the nutrients out , leaving the soil sterile .
Soil.0469	Once the colloids are saturated with H + , the addition of any more hydrogen ions or aluminum hydroxyl cations drives the pH even lower -LRB- more acidic -RRB- as the soil is left with no buffering capacity .
Soil.0470	In extreme rainfall areas and high temperatures , the clay and humus may be washed out , further reducing the buffering capacity of the soil .
Soil.0471	In low rainfall areas , unleached calcium pushes pH to 8.5 and with the addition of exchangeable sodium , soils may reach pH 10 .
Soil.0472	Beyond a pH of 9 , plant growth is reduced .
Soil.0473	High pH results in low micro-nutrient mobility , but water-soluble chelates of those nutrients can supply the deficit .
Soil.0474	Sodium can be reduced by the addition of gypsum -LRB- calcium sulphate -RRB- as calcium adheres to clay more tightly than does sodium causing sodium to be pushed into the soil water solution where it can be washed out by an abundance of water .
Soil.0475	Base saturation percentage There are acid-forming cations -LRB- hydrogen and aluminium -RRB- and there are base-forming cations .
Soil.0476	The fraction of the base-forming cations that occupy positions on the soil colloids is called the base saturation percentage .
Soil.0477	If a soil has a CEC of 20 meq and 5 meq are aluminium and hydrogen cations -LRB- acid-forming -RRB- , the remainder of positions on the colloids -LRB- 20-5 15 meq -RRB- are assumed occupied by base-forming cations , so that the percentage base saturation is 15/20 x 100 % 75 % -LRB- the compliment 25 % is assumed acid-forming cations -RRB- .
Soil.0478	When the soil pH is 7 -LRB- neutral -RRB- , base saturation is 100 percent and there are no hydrogen ions stored on the colloids .
Soil.0479	Base saturation is almost in direct proportion to pH -LRB- increases with increasing pH -RRB- .
Soil.0480	It is of use in calculating the amount of lime needed to neutralise an acid soil .
Soil.0481	The amount of lime needed to neutralize a soil must take account of the amount of acid forming ions on the colloids not just those in the soil water solution .
Soil.0482	The addition of enough lime to neutralize the soil water solution will be insufficient to change the pH , as the acid forming cations will tend to restore the original pH condition as they are pushed off the soil colloids by the calcium of the added lime .
Soil.0483	Buffering of soils The resistance of soil to changes in pH and available cations from the addition of acid or basic material is a measure of the buffering capacity of a soil and increases as the CEC increases .
Soil.0484	Hence , pure sand has almost no buffering ability , while soils high in colloids have high buffering capacity .
Soil.0485	Buffering occurs by cation exchange and neutralisation .
Soil.0486	The addition of a small amount highly basic aqueous ammonia to a soil will cause the ammonium to displace hydrogen ions from the colloids , and the end product is water and colloidally fixed ammonium , but no permanent change overall in soil pH. The addition of a small amount of lime , CaCO3 , will displace hydrogen ions from the soil colloids , causing the fixation of calcium to colloids and the evolution of CO2 and water , with no permanent change in soil pH. The addition of carbonic acid -LRB- the solution of CO2 in water -RRB- will displace calcium from colloids , as hydrogen ions are fixed to the colloids , evolving water and slightly alkaline -LRB- temporary increase in pH -RRB- highly soluble calcium bicarbonate , which will then precipitate as lime -LRB- CaCO3 -RRB- and water at a lower level in the soil profile , with the result of no permanent change in soil pH. All of the above are examples of the buffering of soil pH. The general principal is that an increase in a particular cation in the soil water solution will cause that cation to be fixed to colloids -LRB- buffered -RRB- and a decrease in solution of that cation will cause it to be withdrawn from the colloid and moved into solution -LRB- buffered -RRB- .
Soil.0487	The degree of buffering is limited by the CEC of the soil ; the greater the CEC , the greater the buffering capacity of the soil .
Soil.0488	Nutrients Sixteen nutrients are essential for plant growth and reproduction .
Soil.0489	They are carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , phosphorus , potassium , sulfur , calcium , magnesium , iron , boron , manganese , copper , zinc , molybdenum , and chlorine .
Soil.0490	Nearly all plant nutrients are taken up in ionic forms from the soil solution as cations or as anions .
Soil.0491	Plants release bicarbonate and hydroxyl -LRB- OH - -RRB- anions or hydrogen cations from their roots in an effort to cause nutrient ions to be freed from sequestration on colloids and so forced into the soil solution where they can be picked up .
Soil.0492	Nitrogen is available in soil organic material but is unusable by plants until it is made available by that material 's decomposition by micro-organisms into cation or anion forms .
Soil.0493	Mechanism of nutrient uptake All the nutrients with the exception of carbon are taken up by the plant through its roots .
Soil.0494	All those brought through the roots , with the exception of hydrogen , which is derived from water , are taken up in the form of ions .
Soil.0495	Carbon , in the form of carbon dioxide , enters primarily through the leaf stomata .
Soil.0496	All the hydrogen utilised by the plant originates from soil water and participates with the carbon dioxide in the photosynthetic production of sugars and release of oxygen as a byproduct .
Soil.0497	Plants may have their nutrient needs supplemented by spraying a water solution of nutrients on their leaves , but nutrients are typically received through the roots by : # Mass flow # Diffusion # Root interception The nutrient needs of a plant may be carried to the plant by the movement of the soil water solution in what is called mass flow .
Soil.0498	The absorption of nutrients from the soil solution with which the roots are in contact causes the concentration of nutrients in that area to be reduced .
Soil.0499	Diffusion of nutrients from areas with high concentration to those of lower concentration moves nutrients near the roots as they take up those nutrients .
Soil.0500	Plants constantly send out roots to seek new sources of nutrients in a process called root interception .
Soil.0501	Meanwhile older , less effective roots die back .
Soil.0502	Water is lifted to the leaves , where it is lost by transpiration and in the process it brings soil nutrients with it .
Soil.0503	A maize plant , for example , will use one quart of water per day at the height of its growing season .
Soil.0504	In the above table , phosphorus and potassium nutrients move more by diffusion than they do by mass flow in water solution , as they are rapidly taken up by the roots creating a concentration near zero near the roots .
Soil.0505	The very steep concentration gradient is of greater influence in the movement of those ions than is the movement of those by mass flow .
Soil.0506	The movement by mass flow requires the transpiration of water from the plant causing water and solution ions to also move toward the roots .
Soil.0507	Movement by root interception is slowest as the plants must extend their roots .
Soil.0508	Plants move ions out of their roots in proportion to the amount of nutrients they move in .
Soil.0509	Hydrogen H + is exchanged for cations , and carbonate -LRB- HCO3 - -RRB- and hydroxide -LRB- OH - -RRB- anions are exchanged for nutrient anions .
Soil.0510	Plants derive most of their anion nutrients from decomposing organic matter , which holds 95 percent of the nitrogen , 5 to 60 percent of the phosphorus and 80 percent of the sulfur .
Soil.0511	As plant roots remove nutrients from the soil water solution , nutrients are added to the soil water as other ions move off of clay and humus , are added from the decomposition of soil minerals , and are released by the decomposition of organic matter .
Soil.0512	Where crops are produced , the replenishment of nutrients in the soil must be augmented by the addition of fertiliser or organic matter .
Soil.0513	Carbon Plants obtain their carbon from atmospheric carbon dioxide .
Soil.0514	A plant 's weight is forty-five percent carbon .
Soil.0515	Elementally , carbon is 50 % of plant material .
Soil.0516	Plant residues have a carbon to nitrogen ratio -LRB- C/N -RRB- of 50:1 .
Soil.0517	As the soil organic material is digested by arthropods and micro-organisms , the C/N decreases as the carbonaceous material is metabolised and carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- is released as a byproduct and finds its way out of the soil and into the atmosphere .
Soil.0518	The nitrogen , however , is sequestered in the bodies of the live matter and so it builds up in the soil .
Soil.0519	Normal CO2 concentration in the atmosphere is 0.03 % , which is probably the factor limiting plant growth .
Soil.0520	In a field of maize on a still day during high light conditions in the growing season , the CO2 concentration drops very low , but under such conditions the crop could use up to 20 times the normal concentration .
Soil.0521	The respiration of CO2 by soil micro-organisms decomposing soil organic matter contributes an important amount of CO2 to the photosynthesising plants .
Soil.0522	Within the soil , CO2 concentration is 10 to 100 times atmospheric but may rise to toxic levels if the soil porosity is low or if diffusion is impeded by flooding .
Soil.0523	Nitrogen Nitrogen is the most critical element obtained by plants from the soil and is a bottleneck in plant growth .
Soil.0524	Plants can use the nitrogen as either the ammonium cation -LRB- NH4 + -RRB- or the anion nitrate -LRB- NO3 - -RRB- .
Soil.0525	Nitrogen is seldom missing in the soil , but is often in the form of raw organic material which can not be used directly .
Soil.0526	Some micro-organisms are able to metabolise organic matter and release ammonium in a process called mineralisation .
Soil.0527	Others take free ammonium and oxidise it to nitrate .
Soil.0528	Particular bacteria are capable of metabolising N2 into the form of nitrate in a process called nitrogen fixation .
Soil.0529	Both ammonium and nitrate can be immobilized or essentially lost from the soil by its incorporation into the microbes ' living cells , where it is temporarily sequestered .
Soil.0530	Nitrate may also be lost from the soil when bacteria metabolise it to the gases N2 and N2O .
Soil.0531	In that gaseous form , nitrogen escapes to the atmosphere in a process called denitrification .
Soil.0532	Nitrogen may also be leached from the soil if it is in the form of nitrate or lost to the atmosphere as ammonia due to a chemical reaction of ammonium with alkaline soil by way of a process called volatilisation .
Soil.0533	Ammonium may also be sequestered in clay by fixation .
Soil.0534	A small amount of nitrogen is added to soil by rainfall .
Soil.0535	Nitrogen gains In a process called mineralisation , certain bacteria feed on organic matter , releasing ammonia -LRB- NH3 -RRB- -LRB- which may be reduced to ammonium NH4 + -RRB- and other nutrients .
Soil.0536	As long as the carbon to nitrogen ratio -LRB- C/N -RRB- in the soil is above 30:1 , nitrogen will be in short supply and other bacteria will feed on the ammonium and incorporate its nitrogen into their cells .
Soil.0537	In that form the nitrogen is said to be immobilised .
Soil.0538	Later , when such bacteria die , they too are mineralised and some of the nitrogen is released as ammonium and nitrate .
Soil.0539	If the C/N is less than 15 , ammonia is freed to the soil , where it may be used by bacteria which oxidise it to nitrate in a process called nitrification .
Soil.0540	Bacteria may on average add 25 pounds nitrogen per acre , and in an unfertilised field , this is the most important source of usable nitrogen .
Soil.0541	In a soil with 5 percent organic matter perhaps 2 to 5 percent of that is released to the soil by such decomposition .
Soil.0542	It occurs fastest in warm , moist , well aerated soil .
Soil.0543	The mineralisation of 3 percent of the organic material of a soil that is 4 percent organic matter overall , would release 120 pounds of nitrogen as ammonium per acre .
Soil.0544	In symbiotic fixation , Rhizobium bacteria convert N2 to nitrate by way of nitrogen fixation .
Soil.0545	They have a symbiotic relationship with host plants , wherein they supply the host with nitrogen and the host provides the bacteria with nutrients and a safe environment .
Soil.0546	It is estimated that such symbiotic bacteria in the root nodules of legumes add 45 to 250 pounds of nitrogen per acre per year , which may be sufficient for the crop .
Soil.0547	Other , free-living nitrogen-fixing bacteria and blue-green algae live independently in the soil and release nitrate when their dead bodies are converted by way of mineralisation .
Soil.0548	Some amount of usable nitrogen is fixed by lightning as nitric acid -LRB- HNO3 -RRB- .
Soil.0549	Ammonia , NH3 , previously released from the soil or from combustion , may fall with precipitation as nitric acid at a rate of about five pounds nitrogen per acre per year .
Soil.0550	Nitrogen sequestration When bacteria feed on soluble forms of nitrogen -LRB- ammonium and nitrite -RRB- , they temporarily sequester that nitrogen in their bodies in a process called immobilisation .
Soil.0551	At a later time when those bacteria die , their nitrogen may be released as ammonium by the processes of mineralisation .
Soil.0552	Protein material is easily broken down , but the rate of its decomposition is slowed by its attachment to the crystalline structure of clay and trapped between the clay layers .
Soil.0553	The layers are small enough that bacteria can not enter .
Soil.0554	Some organisms can exude extracellular enzymes that can act on the sequestered proteins .
Soil.0555	However , those enzymes too may be trapped on the clay crystals .
Soil.0556	Ammonium fixation occurs when ammonium replaces the potassium ions that normally exist between the layers of clay such as illite or montmorillonite .
Soil.0557	Only a small fraction of nitrogen is held this way .
Soil.0558	Nitrogen losses Usable nitrogen may be lost from soils when it is in the form of nitrate , as it is easily leached .
Soil.0559	Further losses of nitrogen occur by denitrification , the process whereby soil bacteria convert nitrate -LRB- NO3 - -RRB- to nitrogen gas , N2 or N2O .
Soil.0560	This occurs when poor soil aeration limits free oxygen , forcing bacteria to use the oxygen in nitrate for their respiratory process .
Soil.0561	Denitrification increases when oxidisable organic material is available and when soils are warm and slightly acidic .
Soil.0562	Denitrification may vary throughout a soil as the aeration varies from place to place .
Soil.0563	The conversion of nitrate to gases causes nitrogen to be lost from the soil to the atmosphere .
Soil.0564	Denitrification may cause the loss of 10 to 20 percent of the available nitrates within a day and when conditions are favourable to that process , losses of up to 60 percent of nitrate applied as fertiliser may occur .
Soil.0565	Ammonium volatilisation occurs when ammonium reacts chemically with an alkaline soil , converting NH4 + to NH3 .
Soil.0566	The application of ammonium fertiliser to such a field can result in volatilisation losses of as much as 30 percent .
Soil.0567	Phosphorus Phosphorus is the second most critical plant nutrient .
Soil.0568	The soil mineral apatite is the most common mineral source of phosphorus .
Soil.0569	While there is on average 1000 lb of phosphorus per acre in the soil , it is generally in unavailable forms .
Soil.0570	The available portion of phosphorus is low as it is in the form of phosphates of low solubility .
Soil.0571	Total phosphorus is about 0.1 percent by weight of the soil , but only one percent of that is available .
Soil.0572	Of the part available , more than half comes from the mineralisation of organic matter .
Soil.0573	Agricultural fields may need to be fertilised to make up for the phosphorus that has been removed in the crop .
Soil.0574	When phosphorus does form solubilised ions of H2PO4 - , they rapidly form insoluble phosphates of calcium or hydrous oxides of iron and aluminum .
Soil.0575	Phosphorus is largely immobile in the soil and is not leached but actually builds up in the surface layer if not cropped .
Soil.0576	The application of soluble fertilisers to soils may result in zinc deficiencies as zinc phosphates form .
Soil.0577	Conversely , the application of zinc to soils may immobilise phosphorus as zinc phosphate .
Soil.0578	Lack of phosphorus may interfere with the normal opening of the plant leaf stomata , resulting in plant temperatures 10 percent higher than normal .
Soil.0579	Phosphorus is most available when soil pH is 6.5 in mineral soils and 5.5 in organic soils .
Soil.0580	Potassium The amount of potassium in a soil may be as much as 80,000 lb per acre , of which only 150 lb or 2 percent is available for plant growth .
Soil.0581	When solubilised , half will be held as exchangeable cations on clay while the other half is in the soil water solution .
Soil.0582	Potassium fixation occurs when soils dry and the potassium is bonded between layers of clay .
Soil.0583	Under certain conditions , dependent on the soil texture , intensity of drying , and initial amount of exchangeable potassium , the fixed percentage may be as much as 90 percent within ten minutes .
Soil.0584	Potassium may be leached from soils low in clay .
Soil.0585	Calcium Calcium is 1 percent by weight of soils and is generally available but may be low as it is soluble and can be leached .
Soil.0586	It is thus low in sandy and heavily leached soil or strongly acidic mineral soil .
Soil.0587	Calcium is supplied to the plant in the form of exchangeable ions and moderately soluble minerals .
Soil.0588	Calcium is more available on the soil colloids than is potassium because the common mineral calcite , CaCO3 , is more soluble than potassium-bearing minerals .
Soil.0589	Magnesium Magnesium is central to chlorophyll and aids in the uptake of phosphorus .
Soil.0590	The minimum amount of magnesium required for plant health is not sufficient for the health of forage animals .
Soil.0591	Magnesium is generally available , but is missing from some soils along the Gulf and Atlantic coasts of the United States due to leaching by heavy precipitation .
Soil.0592	Sulfur Most sulfur is made available to plants , like phosphorus , by its release from decomposing organic matter .
Soil.0593	Deficiencies may exist in some soils and if cropped , sulfur needs to be added .
Soil.0594	A 15-ton crop of onions uses up to 19 lb of sulfur and 4 tons of alfalfa uses 15 lb per acre .
Soil.0595	Sulfur abundance varies with depth .
Soil.0596	In a sample of soils in Ohio , United States , the sulfur abundance varied with depths , 0-6 inches , 6-12 inches , 12-18 inches , 18-24 inches in the amounts : 1056 , 830 , 686 , 528 lb per acre respectively .
Soil.0597	Micronutrients Micronutrients include iron , manganese , zinc , copper , boron , chlorine and molybdenum .
Soil.0598	The term refers to plants ' needs , not to their abundance in soil .
Soil.0599	They are required in very small amounts but are essential to plant health in that most are required parts of some enzyme system which speeds up plants ' metabolisms .
Soil.0600	They are generally available in the mineral component of the soil , but the heavy application of phosphates can cause a deficiency in zinc and iron by the formation of insoluble phosphates .
Soil.0601	Iron deficiency may also result from excessive amounts of heavy metals or calcium minerals -LRB- lime -RRB- in the soil .
Soil.0602	Excess amounts of soluble boron , molybdenum and chloride are toxic .
Soil.0603	Organic matter The organic soil matter includes all the dead plant material and all creatures , live and dead .
Soil.0604	The living component of an acre of soil may include 900 lb of earthworms , 2400 lb of fungi , 1500 lb of bacteria , 133 lb of protozoa and 890 lb of arthropods and algae .
Soil.0605	Most living things in soils , including plants , insects , bacteria and fungi , are dependent on organic matter for nutrients and energy .
Soil.0606	Soils have organic compounds in varying degrees of decomposition which rate is dependent on the temperature and soil moisture .
Soil.0607	Bacteria and fungi feed on the raw organic matter , which are fed upon by amoebas , which are fed upon by nemetodes and arthropods .
Soil.0608	Organic matter holds soils open , allowing the infiltration of air and water , and may hold as much as twice its weight in water .
Soil.0609	Many soils , including desert and rocky-gravel soils , have little or no organic matter .
Soil.0610	Soils that are all organic matter , such as peat -LRB- histosols -RRB- , are infertile .
Soil.0611	In its earliest stage of decomposition , the original organic material is often called raw organic matter .
Soil.0612	The final stage of decomposition is called humus .
Soil.0613	Humus Humus refers to organic matter that has been decomposed by soil flora and fauna to the final point where it is resistant to further breakdown .
Soil.0614	Humus usually constitutes only five percent of the soil or less by volume , but it is an essential source of nutrients and adds important textural qualities crucial to soil health and plant growth .
Soil.0615	Humus also hold bits of undecomposed organic matter which feed arthropods and worms which further improve the soil .
Soil.0616	The end produce , humus , is soluble in water and forms a weak acid that can attack silicate minerals .
Soil.0617	Humus has a high cation exchange capacity that on a dry weight basis is many times greater than that of clay colloids .
Soil.0618	It also acts as a buffer , like clay , against changes in pH and soil moisture .
Soil.0619	Humic acids and fulvic acids , which begin as raw organic matter , are important constituents of humus .
Soil.0620	After the death of plants and animals , microbes begin to feed on the residues , resulting finally in the formation of humus .
Soil.0621	With decomposition , there is a reduction of water-soluble constituents including cellulose and hemicellulose and nutrients such as nitrogen , phosphorus , and sulfur .
Soil.0622	As the residues break down , only complex molecules made of aromatic carbon rings , oxygen and hydrogen remain in the form of humin , lignin and lignin complexes as humus .
Soil.0623	While the structure of humus has few nutrients , it is able to attract and hold cation and anion nutrients by weak bonds that can be released in response to changes in soil pH. Lignin is resistant to breakdown and accumulates within the soil .
Soil.0624	It also reacts with amino acids , which further increases its resistance to decomposition , including enzymatic decomposition by microbes .
Soil.0625	Fats and waxes from plant matter have some resistance to decomposition and persist in soils for a while .
Soil.0626	Clay soils often have higher organic contents that persist longer than soils without clay as the organic molecules adhere to and are stabilised by the clay .
Soil.0627	Proteins normally decompose readily , but when bound to clay particles , they become more resistant to decomposition .
Soil.0628	Clay particles also absorb the enzymes exuded by microbes which would normally break down proteins .
Soil.0629	The addition of organic matter to clay soils can render that organic matter and any added nutrients inaccessible to plants and microbes for many years .
Soil.0630	High soil tannin -LRB- polyphenol -RRB- content can cause nitrogen to be sequestered in proteins or cause nitrogen immobilisation .
Soil.0631	Humus formation is a process dependent on the amount of plant material added each year and the type of base soil .
Soil.0632	Both are affected by climate and the type of organisms present .
Soil.0633	Soils with humus can vary in nitrogen content but typically have 3 to 6 percent nitrogen .
Soil.0634	Raw organic matter , as a reserve of nitrogen and phosphorus , is a vital component affecting soil fertility .
Soil.0635	Humus also absorbs water , and expands and shrinks between dry and wet states , increasing soil porosity .
Soil.0636	Humus is less stable than the soil 's mineral constituents , as it is reduced by microbial decomposition , and over time its concentration diminshes without the addition of new organic matter .
Soil.0637	However , humus may persist over centuries if not millennia .
Soil.0638	Climate and organics The production , accumulation and degradation of organic matter are greatly dependent on climate .
Soil.0639	Temperature , soil moisture and topography are the major factors affecting the accumulation of organic matter in soils .
Soil.0640	Organic matter tends to accumulate under wet or cold conditions where decomposer activity is impeded by low temperature or excess moisture which results in anaerobic conditions .
Soil.0641	Conversely , excessive rain and high temperatures of tropical climates , will allow microbes to destroy organic matter to the point that it essentially does not exist .
Soil.0642	Excessive slope may encourage the erosion of the top layer of soil which holds most of the raw organic material that would otherwise eventually become humus .
Soil.0643	Soil horizons A horizontal layer of the soil , whose physical features , composition and age are distinct from those above and beneath , are referred to as a soil horizon .
Soil.0644	The naming of a horizon is based on the type of material of which it is composed .
Soil.0645	Those materials reflect the duration of specific processes of soil formation .
Soil.0646	They are labelled using a shorthand notation of letters and numbers which describe the horizon in terms of its colour , size , texture , structure , consistency , root quantity , pH , voids , boundary characteristics and presence of nodules or concretions .
Soil.0647	Few soil profiles have all the major horizons .
Soil.0648	Some may have only one horizon .
Soil.0649	The exposure of parent material to favourable conditions produces mineral soils that are marginally suitable for plant growth .
Soil.0650	That growth often results in the accumulation of organic residues .
Soil.0651	The accumulated organic layer called the O horizon produces a more active soil due to the effect of the organisms that live within it .
Soil.0652	Organisms colonise and break down organic materials , making available nutrients upon which other plants and animals can live .
Soil.0653	After sufficient time , humus moves downward and is deposited in a distinctive organic surface layer called the A horizon .
Soil.0654	Classification Soil is classified into categories in order to understand relationships between different soils and to determine the suitability of a soil for a particular use .
Soil.0655	One of the first classification systems was developed by the Russian scientist Dokuchaev around 1880 .
Soil.0656	It was modified a number of times by American and European researchers , and developed into the system commonly used until the 1960s .
Soil.0657	It was based on the idea that soils have a particular morphology based on the materials and factors that form them .
Soil.0658	In the 1960s , a different classification system began to emerge which focused on soil morphology instead of parental materials and soil-forming factors .
Soil.0659	Since then it has undergone further modifications .
Soil.0660	The World Reference Base for Soil Resources -LRB- WRB -RRB- aims to establish an international reference base for soil classification .
Soil.0661	USDA soil taxonomy A taxonomy is an arrangement in a systematic manner .
Soil.0662	Soil taxonomy has six categories .
Soil.0663	They are , from most general to specific : order , suborder , great group , subgroup , family and series .
Soil.0664	The soil properties that can be measured quantitatively are used to classify soils .
Soil.0665	A partial list is : depth , moisture , temperature , texture , structure , cation exchange capacity , base saturation , clay mineralogy , organic matter content and salt content .
Soil.0666	In the United States , soil orders are the top hierarchical level of soil classification in the USDA soil taxonomy .
Soil.0667	The names of the orders end with the suffix - sol .
Soil.0668	There are 12 soil orders in Soil Taxonomy : The criteria for the order divisions include properties that reflect major differences in the genesis of soils .
Soil.0669	* Alfisol - soils with aluminium and iron .
Soil.0670	They have horizons of clay accumulation , and form where there is enough moisture and warmth for at least three months of plant growth .
Soil.0671	They constitute 10.1 % of soils worldwide .
Soil.0672	* Andisols - volcanic ash soils .
Soil.0673	They are young and very fertile .
Soil.0674	They cover 1 % of the world 's ice-free surface .
Soil.0675	* Aridisol - dry soils forming under desert conditions which have fewer than 90 consecutive days of moisture during the growing season and are nonleached .
Soil.0676	They include nearly 12 % of soils on Earth .
Soil.0677	Soil formation is slow , and accumulated organic matter is scarce .
Soil.0678	They may have subsurface zones of caliche or duripan .
Soil.0679	Many aridisols have well-developed Bt horizons showing clay movement from past periods of greater moisture .
Soil.0680	* Entisol - recently formed soils that lack well-developed horizons .
Soil.0681	Commonly found on unconsolidated river and beach sediments of sand and clay or volcanic ash , some have an A horizon on top of bedrock .
Soil.0682	They are 18 % of soils worldwide .
Soil.0683	* Gelisols - permafrost soils with permafrost within two metres of the surface or gelic materials and permafrost within one metre .
Soil.0684	They constitute 9.1 % of soils worldwide .
Soil.0685	* Histosol - organic soils , formerly called bog soils , are 1.2 % of soils worldwide .
Soil.0686	* Inceptisol - young soils .
Soil.0687	They have subsurface horizon formation but show little eluviation and illuviation .
Soil.0688	They constitute 15 % of soils worldwide .
Soil.0689	* Mollisols - soft , deep , dark fertile soil formed in grasslands and some hardwood forests with very thick A horizons .
Soil.0690	They are 7 % of soils worldwide .
Soil.0691	* Oxisol - are heavily weathered , are rich in iron and aluminum oxides -LRB- sesquioxides -RRB- or kayolin but low in silica .
Soil.0692	They have only trace nutrients due to heavy tropical rainfall and high temperatures .
Soil.0693	They are 7.5 % of soils worldwide .
Soil.0694	* Spodosol - acid soils with organic colloid layer complexed with iron and aluminium leached from a layer above .
Soil.0695	They are typical soils of coniferous and deciduous forests in cooler climates .
Soil.0696	They constitute 4 % of soils worldwide .
Soil.0697	* Ultisol - acid soils in humid climates , tropical to subtropical temperatures , which are heavily leached of Ca , Mg , and K nutrients .
Soil.0698	They are not quite Oxisols .
Soil.0699	They are 8.1 % of the soil worldwide .
Soil.0700	* Vertisol - inverted soils .
Soil.0701	They are clay-rich and tend to swell when wet and shrink upon drying , often forming deep cracks into which surface layers can fall .
Soil.0702	They are difficult to farm or to construct roads and buildings due to their high expansion rate .
Soil.0703	They constitute 2.4 % of soils worldwide .
Soil.0704	The percentages listed above are for land area free of ice .
Soil.0705	`` Soils of Mountains '' , which constitute the balance -LRB- 11.6 % -RRB- , have a mixture of those listed above , or are classified as `` Rugged Mountains '' which have no soil .
Soil.0706	The above soil orders in sequence of increasing degree of development are Entisols , Inceptisols , Aridisols , Mollisols , Alfisols , Spodosols , Ultisols , and Oxisols .
Soil.0707	Histosols and Vertisols may appear in any of the above at any time during their development .
Soil.0708	The soil suborders within an order are differentiated on the basis of soil properties and horizons which depend on soil moisture and temperature .
Soil.0709	Forty-seven suborders are recognized in the United States .
Soil.0710	The soil great group category is a subdivision of a suborder in which the kind and sequence of soil horizons distinguish one soil from another .
Soil.0711	About 185 great groups are recognized in the United States .
Soil.0712	Horizons marked by clay , iron , humus and hard pans and soil features such as the expansion-contraction of clays -LRB- that produce self-mixing provided by clay -RRB- , temperature , and marked quantities of various salts are used as distinguishing features .
Soil.0713	The great group categories are divided into three kinds of soil subgroups : typic , intergrade and extragrade .
Soil.0714	A typic subgroup represents the basic or ` typical ' concept of the great group to which the described subgroup belongs .
Soil.0715	An intergrade subgroup describes the properties that suggest how it grades towards -LRB- is similar to -RRB- soils of other soil great groups , suborders or orders .
Soil.0716	These properties are not developed or expressed well enough to cause the soil to be included within the great group towards which they grade , but suggest similarities .
Soil.0717	Extragrade features are aberrant properties which prevent that soil from being included in another soil classification .
Soil.0718	About 1,000 soil subgroups are defined in the United States .
Soil.0719	A soil family category is a group of soils within a subgroup and describes the physical and chemical properties which affect the response of soil to agricultural management and engineering applications .
Soil.0720	The principal characteristics used to differentiate soil families include texture , mineralogy , pH , permeability , structure , consistency , the locale 's precipitation pattern , and soil temperature .
Soil.0721	For some soils the criteria also specify the percentage of silt , sand and coarse fragments such as gravel , cobbles and rocks .
Soil.0722	About 4,500 soil families are recognised in the United States .
Soil.0723	A family may contain several soil series which describe the physical location using the name of a prominent physical feature such as a river or town near where the soil sample was taken .
Soil.0724	An example would be Merrimac for the Merrimack River in New Hampshire , USA .
Soil.0725	More than 14,000 soil series are recognised in the United States .
Soil.0726	This permits very specific descriptions of soils .
Soil.0727	A soil phase of series , originally called ` soil type ' describes the soil surface texture , slope , stoniness , saltiness , erosion , and other conditions .
Soil.0728	Australian soil taxonomy There are fourteen soil orders at the top level of the Australian Soil Classification .
Soil.0729	They are : Anthroposols , Organosols , Podosols , Vertosols , Hydrosols , Kurosols , Sodosols , Chromosols , Calcarosols , Ferrosols , Dermosols , Kandosols , Rudosols and Tenosols .
Soil.0730	Uses Soil is used in agriculture , where it serves as the anchor and primary nutrient base for plants ; however , as demonstrated by hydroponics , it is not essential to plant growth if the soil-contained nutrients can be dissolved in a solution .
Soil.0731	The types of soil and available moisture determine the species of plants that can be cultivated .
Soil.0732	Soil material is also a critical component in the mining and construction industries .
Soil.0733	Soil serves as a foundation for most construction projects .
Soil.0734	The movement of massive volumes of soil can be involved in surface mining , road building and dam construction .
Soil.0735	Earth sheltering is the architectural practice of using soil for external thermal mass against building walls .
Soil.0736	Soil resources are critical to the environment , as well as to food and fibre production .
Soil.0737	Soil provides minerals and water to plants .
Soil.0738	Soil absorbs rainwater and releases it later , thus preventing floods and drought .
Soil.0739	Soil cleans water as it percolates through it .
Soil.0740	Soil is the habitat for many organisms : the major part of known and unknown biodiversity is in the soil , in the form of invertebrates -LRB- earthworms , woodlice , millipedes , centipedes , snails , slugs , mites , springtails , enchytraeids , nematodes , protists -RRB- , bacteria , archaea , fungi and algae ; and most organisms living above ground have part of them -LRB- plants -RRB- or spend part of their life cycle -LRB- insects -RRB- below-ground .
Soil.0741	Above-ground and below-ground biodiversities are tightly interconnected , making soil protection of paramount importance for any restoration or conservation plan .
Soil.0742	The biological component of soil is an extremely important carbon sink since about 57 % of the biotic content is carbon .
Soil.0743	Even on desert crusts , cyanobacteria lichens and mosses capture and sequester a significant amount of carbon by photosynthesis .
Soil.0744	Poor farming and grazing methods have degraded soils and released much of this sequestered carbon to the atmosphere .
Soil.0745	Restoring the world 's soils could offset some of the huge increase in greenhouse gases causing global warming , while improving crop yields and reducing water needs .
Soil.0746	Waste management often has a soil component .
Soil.0747	Septic drain fields treat septic tank effluent using aerobic soil processes .
Soil.0748	Landfills use soil for daily cover .
Soil.0749	Land application of waste water relies on soil biology to aerobically treat BOD .
Soil.0750	Organic soils , especially peat , serve as a significant fuel resource ; but wide areas of peat production , such as sphagnum bogs , are now protected because of patrimonial interest .
Soil.0751	Both animals and humans in many cultures occasionally consume soil .
Soil.0752	It has been shown that some monkeys consume soil , together with their preferred food -LRB- tree foliage and fruits -RRB- , in order to alleviate tannin toxicity .
Soil.0753	Soils filter and purify water and affect its chemistry .
Soil.0754	Rain water and pooled water from ponds , lakes and rivers percolate through the soil horizons and the upper rock strata , thus becoming groundwater .
Soil.0755	Pests -LRB- viruses -RRB- and pollutants , such as persistent organic pollutants -LRB- chlorinated pesticides , polychlorinated biphenyls -RRB- , oils -LRB- hydrocarbons -RRB- , heavy metals -LRB- lead , zinc , cadmium -RRB- , and excess nutrients -LRB- nitrates , sulfates , phosphates -RRB- are filtered out by the soil .
Soil.0756	Soil organisms metabolise them or immobilise them in their biomass and necromass , thereby incorporating them into stable humus .
Soil.0757	The physical integrity of soil is also a prerequisite for avoiding landslides in rugged landscapes .
Soil.0758	Degradation Here , land degradation refers to a human-induced or natural process which impairs the capacity of land to function .
Soil.0759	Soils are the critical component in land degradation when it involves acidification , contamination , desertification , erosion or salination .
Soil.0760	While soil acidification is beneficial in the case of alkaline soils , it degrades land when it lowers crop productivity and increases soil vulnerability to contamination and erosion .
Soil.0761	Soils are often initially acid because their parent materials were acid and initially low in the basic cations -LRB- calcium , magnesium , potassium and sodium -RRB- .
Soil.0762	Acidification occurs when these elements are removed from the soil profile by normal rainfall or the harvesting of forest or agricultural crops .
Soil.0763	Soil acidification is accelerated by the use of acid-forming nitrogenous fertilizers and by the effects of acid precipitation .
Soil.0764	Soil contamination at low levels is often within soil 's capacity to treat and assimilate .
Soil.0765	Many waste treatment processes rely on this treatment capacity .
Soil.0766	Exceeding treatment capacity can damage soil biota and limit soil function .
Soil.0767	Derelict soils occur where industrial contamination or other development activity damages the soil to such a degree that the land can not be used safely or productively .
Soil.0768	Remediation of derelict soil uses principles of geology , physics , chemistry and biology to degrade , attenuate , isolate or remove soil contaminants to restore soil functions and values .
Soil.0769	Techniques include leaching , air sparging , chemical amendments , phytoremediation , bioremediation and natural attenuation .
Soil.0770	Desertification is an environmental process of ecosystem degradation in arid and semi-arid regions , often caused by human activity .
Soil.0771	It is a common misconception that droughts cause desertification .
Soil.0772	Droughts are common in arid and semiarid lands .
Soil.0773	Well-managed lands can recover from drought when the rains return .
Soil.0774	Soil management tools include maintaining soil nutrient and organic matter levels , reduced tillage and increased cover .
Soil.0775	These practices help to control erosion and maintain productivity during periods when moisture is available .
Soil.0776	Continued land abuse during droughts , however , increases land degradation .
Soil.0777	Increased population and livestock pressure on marginal lands accelerates desertification .
Soil.0778	Erosion of soil is caused by wind , water , ice and movement in response to gravity .
Soil.0779	Although the processes may be simultaneous , erosion is distinguished from weathering .
Soil.0780	Erosion is an intrinsic natural process , but in many places it is increased by human land use .
Soil.0781	Poor land use practices include deforestation , overgrazing and improper construction activity .
Soil.0782	Improved management can limit erosion by using techniques like limiting disturbance during construction , avoiding construction during erosion-prone periods , intercepting runoff , terrace-building , use of erosion-suppressing cover materials , and planting trees or other soil-binding plants .
Soil.0783	A serious and long-running water erosion problem occurs in China , on the middle reaches of the Yellow River and the upper reaches of the Yangtze River .
Soil.0784	From the Yellow River , over 1.6 billion tons of sediment flow each year into the ocean .
Soil.0785	The sediment originates primarily from water erosion -LRB- gully erosion -RRB- in the Loess Plateau region of northwest China .
Soil.0786	Soil piping is a particular form of soil erosion that occurs below the soil surface .
Soil.0787	It is associated with levee and dam failure , as well as sink hole formation .
Soil.0788	Turbulent flow removes soil starting from the mouth of the seep flow and subsoil erosion advances upgradient .
Soil.0789	The term sand boil is used to describe the appearance of the discharging end of an active soil pipe .
Soil.0790	Soil salination is the accumulation of free salts to such an extent that it leads to degradation of the agricultural value of soils and vegetation .
Soil.0791	Consequences include corrosion damage , reduced plant growth , erosion due to loss of plant cover and soil structure , and water quality problems due to sedimentation .
Soil.0792	Salination occurs due to a combination of natural and human-caused processes .
Soil.0793	Arid conditions favour salt accumulation .
Soil.0794	This is especially apparent when soil parent material is saline .
Soil.0795	Irrigation of arid lands is especially problematic .
Soil.0796	All irrigation water has some level of salinity .
Soil.0797	Irrigation , especially when it involves leakage from canals and overirrigation in the field , often raises the underlying water table .
Soil.0798	Rapid salination occurs when the land surface is within the capillary fringe of saline groundwater .
Soil.0799	Soil salinity control involves watertable control and flushing with higher levels of applied water in combination with tile drainage or another form of subsurface drainage .
Soil.0800	Soil salinity models like SWAP , DrainMod-S , UnSatChem , SaltMod and SahysMod are used to assess the cause of soil salination and to optimise the reclamation of irrigated saline soils .
Soil.0801	Reclamation Soils which contain high levels of particular clays , such as smectites , are often very fertile .
Soil.0802	For example , the smectite-rich clays of Thailand 's Central Plains are among the most productive in the world .
Soil.0803	Many farmers in tropical areas , however , struggle to retain organic matter in the soils they work .
Soil.0804	In recent years , for example , productivity has declined in the low-clay soils of northern Thailand .
Soil.0805	Farmers initially responded by adding organic matter from termite mounds , but this was unsustainable in the long-term .
Soil.0806	Scientists experimented with adding bentonite , one of the smectite family of clays , to the soil .
Soil.0807	In field trials , conducted by scientists from the International Water Management Institute in cooperation with Khon Kaen University and local farmers , this had the effect of helping retain water and nutrients .
Soil.0808	Supplementing the farmer 's usual practice with a single application of 200 kg bentonite per rai -LRB- 6.26 rai = 1 hectare -RRB- resulted in an average yield increase of 73 % .
Soil.0809	More work showed that applying bentonite to degraded sandy soils reduced the risk of crop failure during drought years .
Soil.0810	In 2008 , three years after the initial trials , IWMI scientists conducted a survey among 250 farmers in northeast Thailand , half of whom had applied bentonite to their fields .
Soil.0811	The average improvement for those using the clay addition was 18 % higher than for non-clay users .
Soil.0812	Using the clay had enabled some farmers to switch to growing vegetables , which need more fertile soil .
Soil.0813	This helped to increase their income .
Soil.0814	The researchers estimated that 200 farmers in northeast Thailand and 400 in Cambodia had adopted the use of clays , and that a further 20,000 farmers were introduced to the new technique .
Soil.0815	If the soil is too high in clay , adding gypsum , washed river sand and organic matter will balance the composition .
Soil.0816	Adding organic matter to soil which is depleted in nutrients and too high in sand will boost its quality .
Semantic primes.0000	bytes = `` 8962 '' > Semantic primes or semantic primitives are semantic concepts that are innately understood , but can not be expressed in simpler terms .
Semantic primes.0001	They represent words or phrases that are learned through practice , but can not be defined concretely .
Semantic primes.0002	For example , although the meaning of `` touching '' is readily understood , a dictionary might define `` touch '' as `` to make contact '' and `` contact '' as `` touching '' , providing no information if neither of these words are understood .
Semantic primes.0003	The concept of innate semantic primes was largely introduced by Anna Wierzbicka 's book , Semantics : Primes and Universals .
Semantic primes.0004	List of semantic primes Table adapted from Goddard , 2002 .
Semantic primes.0005	A universal syntax of meaning Semantic primes represent universally meaningful concepts , but to have meaningful messages , or statements , such concepts must combine in a way that they themselves convey meaning .
Semantic primes.0006	Such meaningful combinations , in their simplest form as sentences , constitute the syntax of the language .
Semantic primes.0007	Wierzbicka provides evidence that just as all languages use the same set of semantic primes , they also use the same , or very similar syntax .
Semantic primes.0008	She states : `` I am also positing certain innate and universal rules of syntax-not in the sense of some intuitively unverifiable formal syntax a la Chomsky , but in the sense of intuitively verifiable patterns determining possible combinations of primitive concepts -LRB- Wierzbicka , 1996 -RRB- . ''
Semantic primes.0009	She gives one example comparing the English sentence , `` I want to do this '' , with its equivalent in Russian .
Semantic primes.0010	Although she notes certain formal differences between the two sentence structures , their semantic equivalence emerges from the '' ... equivalence of the primitives themselves and of the rules for their combination . ''
Semantic primes.0011	This work -LSB- of Wierzbicka and colleagues -RSB- has led to a set of a highly concrete proposals about a hypothesised irreducible core of all human languages .
Semantic primes.0012	This universal core is believed to have a fully ` language-like ' character in the sense that it consists of a lexicon of semantic primitives together with a syntax governing how the primitives can be combined -LRB- Goddard , 1998 -RRB- .
Semantic primes.0013	It might strike many as not particularly surprising that all humans today possess a common language core of semantic primes and a more or less universal syntax , inasmuch as modern science teaches that all humans today descended from a common speech-enabled male and female Homo sapiens ancestor living in Africa before the exodus of a founder group that left Africa and dispersed throughout the world into at first many geographically separate groups developing into different so-called races .
Semantic primes.0014	Linguist Johanna Nichols traces Homo sapiens language origin as far back as 130,000 years ago , perhaps only 65,000 years after the earliest Homo sapiens fossil finds -LRB- Adler , 2000 -RRB- .
Semantic primes.0015	Philosopher G. J. Whitrow expresses it : ... despite the great diversity of existing languages and dialect , the capacity for language appears to be identical in all races .
Semantic primes.0016	Consequently , we can conclude that man 's linguistic ability existed before racial diversification occurred -LRB- Whitrow , 1988 -RRB- .
Semantic primes.0017	Natural Semantic Metalanguage -LRB- NSM -RRB- In effect , the combination of a set of semantic primes each representing a different basic concept , residing in minds with a propensity to acquire certain basic concepts , and a common set of rules for combining those concepts into meaningful messages , constitutes a natural semantic prime language , or natural semantic metalanguage .
Semantic primes.0018	In English , the natural semantic metalanguage reduces language to a core that enables full development of the English language .
Semantic primes.0019	A new word can be added as a shorthand substitute for a ` text ' in the natural semantic metalanguage , a ` text ' that can convey what English speakers mean by lie , by what a person does when he says something not true because he wants someone to think it true .
Semantic primes.0020	Any English word can be described -LRB- defined -RRB- with a text using a primitive lexicon of about 60 words -LRB- concepts -RRB- in the English natural semantic metalanguage .
Semantic primes.0021	Likewise can any complex semantic sentence in English be paraphrased reductively to the core words and syntax of the natural semantic metalanguage .
Semantic primes.0022	The texts can make subtle distinctions English-speakers make between happy , glad , joyful , ecstatic , etc. , and can supply those distinctions to those who want to know them .
Semantic primes.0023	Given the universal nature of the list of semantic primes among languages , and of the grammar , every language has essentially the same natural semantic metalanguage , though each semantic prime sounds different among languages and the appearance of the syntax may differ .
Semantic primes.0024	Wierzbicka and colleagues refer to all the natural semantic metalanguages as ` isomorphic ' with each other .
Semantic primes.0025	Conceivably , if the dictionary of meaning descriptions of each language was reductively paraphrased in the text of its natural semantic metalanguage , and that natural semantic metalangugage was translated to a common natural semantic metalanguage for all natural languages , it would greatly reduce language barriers .
Semantic primes.0026	Notes References cited * * Adler R. -LRB- 2000 -RRB- -LSB- http://www.newscientist.com/article/mg16522274.500-voices-from-the-past.html `` Voices from the past '' -RSB- New Scientist , 26 February .
Semantic primes.0027	* Goddard C. -LRB- 1998 -RRB- Bad arguments against semantic primitives .
Semantic primes.0028	Theoretical Linguistics 24:129 -156 .
Semantic primes.0029	-LSB- http://www.une.edu.au/bcss/linguistics/nsm/pdfs/bad-arguments5.pdf View/Download PDF of article -RSB- -LSB- Goddard : '' ... this paper is heterogenous in nature and polemical in purpose ... '' -RSB- * Goddard C. -LRB- 2002 -RRB- The search for the shared semantic core of all languages .
Semantic primes.0030	In Cliff Goddard and Anna Wierzbicka -LRB- eds -RRB- .
Semantic primes.0031	Meaning and Universal Grammar - Theory and Empirical Findings .
Semantic primes.0032	Volume I. Amsterdam : John Benjamins .
Semantic primes.0033	pp. 5 -- 40 .
Semantic primes.0034	-LSB- http://www.une.edu.au/lcl/nsm/pdf/Goddard_Ch1_2002.pdf View/Download PDF of the book chapter -RSB- * Goddard C. , Wierzbicka A. -LRB- eds . -RRB-
Semantic primes.0035	-LRB- 1994 -RRB- Semantic and Lexical Universals : Theory and Empirical Findings .
Semantic primes.0036	Amsterdam : John Benjamins .
Semantic primes.0037	-LSB- http://www.benjamins.com/cgi-bin/t_bookview.cgi?bookid=SLCS%2025 Publisher 's website 's description of book , with Table of Contents -RSB- * Whitrow GJ .
Semantic primes.0038	-LRB- 1988 -RRB- Time in History : The evolution of our general awareness of time and temporal perspective .
Semantic primes.0039	Oxford University Press .
Semantic primes.0040	ISBN 0-19-215361-7 .
Semantic primes.0041	p. 11 .
Semantic primes.0042	* Wierzbicka A. -LRB- 1996 -RRB- Semantics : Primes and Universals .
Semantic primes.0043	Oxford University Press .
Semantic primes.0044	ISBN 0-19-870002-4 .
Semantic primes.0045	-LSB- http://www.oup.com/uk/catalogue/?ci9780198700036 Publisher 's website 's description of book -RSB- -LSB- http://arts.anu.edu.au/languages/linguistics/AnnaW.asp Professor Wierzbicka 's faculty webpage -RSB- -LSB- http://books.google.com/books?id ZN029Pmbnu4C Excerpts from Chapters 1 and 2 -RSB-
Natural semantic metalanguage.0000	bytes = `` 5691 '' > The Natural semantic metalanguage -LRB- NSM -RRB- is a linguistic theory based on the conception of Polish professor Andrzej Bogusławski .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0001	The leading proponents of the theory are Anna Wierzbicka at Warsaw University and later at the Australian National University who originated the theory in the early 1970s -LRB- Wierzbicka 1972 -RRB- , and Cliff Goddard at Australia 's Griffith University -LRB- Goddard & Wierzbicka 1994 , 2002 -RRB- .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0002	Approach Linguists of the NSM school rely on semantic primitives -LRB- or semantic primes -RRB- for analysis -LRB- that is , simple , indefinable , and universally lexicalized concepts -RRB- and reductive paraphrase -LRB- that is , breaking complex concepts down into simpler concepts -RRB- .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0003	Research in the NSM approach deals extensively with language and cognition , and language and culture .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0004	Key areas of research include lexical semantics , grammatical semantics , phraseology and pragmatics , as well as cross-cultural communication .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0005	Languages studied in the NSM-framework include English , Russian , Polish , French , Spanish , Malay , Japanese , Chinese , Korean , Ewe and East Cree , as well as Swedish .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0006	Semantic primitives The declared NSM primes have stabilized as a list of irreducible meanings , coded here as English words with specific senses .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0007	These primes are hypothesized to be language universals , with most of them having been tested across a wide variety of languages without encountering disconfirmation .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0008	It is very important to realize that some of the exponents in the following list have meanings in English that are not shared with other languages , but when used as an exponent in the Natural Semantic Metalanguage , we are only concerned with the meanings that are universal .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0009	The English exponents of semantic primitives ; substantives : I , YOU , SOMEONE , PEOPLE , SOMETHING/THING , BODY ; relational substantives : KIND , PART ; determiners : THIS , THE SAME , OTHER/ELSE ; quantifiers : ONE , TWO , MUCH/MANY , SOME , ALL ; evaluators : GOOD , BAD ; descriptors : BIG , SMALL ; mental predicates : THINK , KNOW , WANT , FEEL , SEE , HEAR ; speech : SAY , WORDS , TRUE ; actions , events , movement , contact : DO , HAPPEN , MOVE , TOUCH ; location , existence , possession , specification : BE -LRB- SOMEWHERE -RRB- , THERE IS , HAVE , BE -LRB- SOMEONE/SOMETHING -RRB- ; life and death : LIVE , DIE ; time : WHEN/TIME , NOW , BEFORE , AFTER , A LONG TIME , A SHORT TIME , FOR SOME TIME , MOMENT ; space : WHERE/PLACE , HERE , ABOVE , BELOW , FAR , NEAR , SIDE , INSIDE ; logical concepts : NOT , MAYBE , CAN , BECAUSE , IF ; intensifier , augmentor : VERY , MORE ; similarity : LIKE/WAY Bibliography * Goddard , Cliff .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0010	1998 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0011	Semantic Analysis : A practical introduction .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0012	Oxford .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0013	Oxford University Press .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0014	* Goddard , Cliff -LRB- ed . -RRB-
Natural semantic metalanguage.0015	2006 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0016	Ethnopragmatics - Understanding discourse in cultural context .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0017	Berlin : Mouton de Gruyter .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0018	* Goddard , Cliff -LRB- ed . -RRB-
Natural semantic metalanguage.0019	2008 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0020	Cross-Linguistic Semantics .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0021	Amsterdam/Philadelphia : John Benjamins .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0022	* Goddard , Cliff and Wierzbicka , Anna -LRB- eds . -RRB- .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0023	1994 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0024	Semantic and Lexical Universals - Theory and Empirical Findings .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0025	Amsterdam/Philadelphia : John Benjamins .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0026	* Goddard , Cliff and Wierzbicka , Anna -LRB- eds . -RRB- .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0027	2002 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0028	Meaning and Universal Grammar : Theory and Empirical Findings -LRB- 2 volumes -RRB- .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0029	Amsterdam/Philadelphia : John Benjamins .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0030	* Harkins , Jean & Anna Wierzbicka .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0031	2001 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0032	Emotions in Crosslinguistic Perspective .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0033	Berlin : Mouton de Gruyter .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0034	* Peeters , Bert -LRB- ed . -RRB-
Natural semantic metalanguage.0035	2006 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0036	Semantic Primes and Universal Grammar : Empirical evidence from the Romance languages .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0037	Amsterdam : John Benjamins .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0038	* Wierzbicka , Anna .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0039	1972 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0040	Semantic Primitives .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0041	Frankfurt : Athenäum .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0042	* Wierzbicka , Anna .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0043	1992 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0044	Semantics , Culture , and Cognition .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0045	Oxford : Oxford University Press .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0046	* Wierzbicka , Anna .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0047	1996 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0048	Semantics : Primes and Universals .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0049	Oxford : Oxford University Press .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0050	* Wierzbicka , Anna .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0051	1997 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0052	Understanding Cultures Through Their Key Words .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0053	Oxford : Oxford University Press .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0054	* Wierzbicka , Anna .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0055	1999 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0056	Emotions Across Languages and Cultures .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0057	Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0058	* Wierzbicka , Anna .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0059	2003 -LRB- 1991 -RRB- .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0060	Cross-cultural Pragmatics : The semantics of human interaction .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0061	2nd edition .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0062	Berlin : Mouton de Gruyter .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0063	* Wierzbicka , Anna .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0064	2006 .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0065	English : Meaning and culture .
Natural semantic metalanguage.0066	New York : Oxford University Press .
Spell (paranormal).0000	bytes = `` 5897 '' > A spell , charm , or incantation is a set of words , spoken or unspoken -LRB- prayer -RRB- .
Spell (paranormal).0001	Spellcasting is considered by its user to invoke some magical effect .
Spell (paranormal).0002	Historical attestations exist for the use of some variety of incantations in many cultures around the world .
Spell (paranormal).0003	Pharmakeia is often the vehicle for binding someone with a spell with and without uttered words .
Spell (paranormal).0004	Often binding someone with a spell by the use of spoken word formulas involves the use of evocation .
Spell (paranormal).0005	Historical spells Surviving written records of whole magic spells were largely obliterated in many cultures by the success of the major monotheistic religions , Islam , Judaism and Christianity , which label some magic activity as immoral or associated with evil .
Spell (paranormal).0006	Spells would generally be distinguished from magic symbols , words , patterns , recipes , practices and other forms of magic that were not directly exercised by a collection of words .
Spell (paranormal).0007	However , some spells were combinations or repetitions of words that were considered to have magic power , but which were not in sentences or verse .
Spell (paranormal).0008	Europe Surviving examples from northern Europe include For a Swarm of Bees , the Nine Herbs Charm and the Merseburg Incantations .
Spell (paranormal).0009	Ancient Egypt Due to the surviving written record of ancient Egyptian culture , a number of references to magic and complete examples exist .
Spell (paranormal).0010	In particular the embalming and interring process involved the use of many documented spells , for example from the Book of the Dead .
Spell (paranormal).0011	Modern uses and interpretations The performance of magic almost always involves the use of language .
Spell (paranormal).0012	Whether spoken out loud or unspoken , words are frequently used to access or guide magical power .
Spell (paranormal).0013	In `` The Magical Power of Words '' -LRB- 1968 -RRB- S. J. Tambiah argues that the connection between language and magic is due to a belief in the inherent ability of words to influence the universe .
Spell (paranormal).0014	Bronisław Malinowski , in Coral Gardens and their Magic -LRB- 1935 -RRB- , suggests that this belief is an extension of man 's basic use of language to describe his surroundings , in which `` the knowledge of the right words , appropriate phrases and the more highly developed forms of speech , gives man a power over and above his own limited field of personal action . ''
Spell (paranormal).0015	Magical speech is therefore a ritual act and is of equal or even greater importance to the performance of magic than non-verbal acts .
Spell (paranormal).0016	Not all speech is considered magical .
Spell (paranormal).0017	Only certain words and phrases or words spoken in a specific context are considered to have magical power .
Spell (paranormal).0018	Magical language , according to C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards 's -LRB- 1923 -RRB- categories of speech , is distinct from scientific language because it is emotive and it converts words into symbols for emotions ; whereas in scientific language words are tied to specific meanings and refer to an objective external reality .
Spell (paranormal).0019	Magical language is therefore particularly adept at constructing metaphors that establish symbols and link magical rituals to the world .
Spell (paranormal).0020	Malinowski argues that `` the language of magic is sacred , set and used for an entirely different purpose to that of ordinary life . ''
Spell (paranormal).0021	The two forms of language are differentiated through word choice , grammar , style , or by the use of specific phrases or forms : prayers , spells , songs , blessings , or chants , for example .
Spell (paranormal).0022	Sacred modes of language often employ archaic words and forms in an attempt to invoke the purity or `` truth '' of a religious or a cultural `` golden age '' .
Spell (paranormal).0023	The use of Hebrew in Judaism is an example .
Spell (paranormal).0024	Another potential source of the power of words is their secrecy and exclusivity .
Spell (paranormal).0025	Much sacred language is differentiated enough from common language that it is incomprehensible to the majority of the population and it can only be used and interpreted by specialized practitioners -LRB- magicians , priests , shamans , even mullahs -RRB- .
Spell (paranormal).0026	In this respect , Tambiah argues that magical languages violate the primary function of language : communication .
Spell (paranormal).0027	Yet adherents of magic are still able to use and to value the magical function of words by believing in the inherent power of the words themselves and in the meaning that they must provide for those who do understand them .
Spell (paranormal).0028	This leads Tambiah to conclude that `` the remarkable disjunction between sacred and profane language which exists as a general fact is not necessarily linked to the need to embody sacred words in an exclusive language . ''
Magic (paranormal).0000	bytes = `` 96332 '' > Magic is the art of producing a desired effect or result through the use of incantation , ceremony , ritual , the casting of spells or various other techniques that presumably assure human control of supernatural agencies or the forces of nature .
Magic (paranormal).0001	Magic has been practiced in many cultures , and utilizes ways of understanding , experiencing and influencing the world somewhat akin to those offered by religion , though it is sometimes regarded as more focused on achieving results than religious worship .
Magic (paranormal).0002	Magic is often viewed with suspicion by the wider community , and is commonly practiced in isolation and secrecy .
Magic (paranormal).0003	Modern Western magicians generally state magic 's primary purpose to be personal spiritual growth .
Magic (paranormal).0004	Modern perspectives on the theory of magic broadly follow two major views .
Magic (paranormal).0005	The first sees magic as a result of a universal sympathy within the universe , where if something is done here a result happens somewhere else .
Magic (paranormal).0006	The other view sees magic as a collaboration with spirits who cause the effect .
Magic (paranormal).0007	Etymology Through late 14th century Old French magique , the word `` magic '' derives via Latin magicus from the Greek adjective magikos -LRB- μαγικός -RRB- used in reference to the `` magical '' arts of the Persian Magicians -LRB- Greek : magoi , singular mágos , μάγος -RRB- , the Zoroastrian astrologer priests of the ancient Persian Empire .
Magic (paranormal).0008	Greek mágos is first attested in Heraclitus -LRB- 6th century BC , apud .
Magic (paranormal).0009	Clement Protrepticus 12 -RRB- who curses the Magians and others for their `` impious rites '' .
Magic (paranormal).0010	Likewise , sorcery was taken in ca. 1300 from Old French sorcerie , which is from Vulgar Latin * sortiarius , from sors `` fate '' , apparently meaning `` one who influences fate '' .
Magic (paranormal).0011	Common features of magical practice Rituals Magical rituals are the precisely defined actions -LRB- including speech -RRB- used to work magic .
Magic (paranormal).0012	Bronisław Malinowski describes ritual language as possessing a high `` coefficient of weirdness '' , by which he means that the language used in ritual is archaic and out of the ordinary , which helps foster the proper mindset to believe in the ritual .
Magic (paranormal).0013	S. J. Tambiah notes , however , that even if the power of the ritual is said to reside in the words , `` the words only become effective if uttered in a very special context of other action . ''
Magic (paranormal).0014	These other actions typically consist of gestures , possibly performed with special objects at a particular place or time .
Magic (paranormal).0015	Object , location , and performer may require purification beforehand .
Magic (paranormal).0016	This caveat draws a parallel to the felicity conditions J. L. Austin requires of performative utterances .
Magic (paranormal).0017	By `` performativity '' Austin means that the ritual act itself achieves the stated goal .
Magic (paranormal).0018	For example , a wedding ceremony can be understood as a ritual , and only by properly performing the ritual does the marriage occur .
Magic (paranormal).0019	Émile Durkheim stresses the importance of rituals as a tool to achieve `` collective effervescence '' , which serves to help unify society .
Magic (paranormal).0020	On the other hand , some psychologists compare such rituals to obsessive-compulsive rituals , noting that attentional focus falls on the lower level representation of simple gestures .
Magic (paranormal).0021	This results in goal demotion , as the ritual places more emphasis on performing the ritual just right than on the connection between the ritual and the goal .
Magic (paranormal).0022	Magical symbols Magic often utilizes symbols that are thought to be intrinsically efficacious .
Magic (paranormal).0023	Anthropologists , such as Sir James Frazer -LRB- 1854 -- 1938 -RRB- , have characterized the implementation of symbols into two primary categories : the `` principle of similarity '' , and the `` principle of contagion . ''
Magic (paranormal).0024	Frazer further categorized these principles as falling under `` sympathetic magic '' , and `` contagious magic . ''
Magic (paranormal).0025	Frazer asserted that these concepts were `` general or generic laws of thought , which were misapplied in magic . ''
Magic (paranormal).0026	Principle of similarity The principle of similarity , also known as the `` association of ideas '' , which falls under the category of sympathetic magic , is the thought that if a certain result follows a certain action , then that action must be responsible for the result .
Magic (paranormal).0027	Therefore , if one is to perform this action again , the same result can again be expected .
Magic (paranormal).0028	One classic example of this mode of thought is that of the rooster and the sunrise .
Magic (paranormal).0029	When a rooster crows , it is a response to the rising of the sun .
Magic (paranormal).0030	Based on sympathetic magic , one might interpret these series of events differently .
Magic (paranormal).0031	The law of similarity would suggest that since the sunrise follows the crowing of the rooster , the rooster must have caused the sun to rise .
Magic (paranormal).0032	Causality is inferred where it might not otherwise have been .
Magic (paranormal).0033	Therefore , a practitioner might believe that if he is able to cause the rooster to crow , he will be able to control the timing of the sunrise .
Magic (paranormal).0034	Another use of the principle of similarity is the construction and manipulation of representations of some target to be affected -LRB- e.g. voodoo dolls -RRB- , believed to bring about a corresponding effect on the target -LRB- e.g. breaking a limb of a doll will bring about an injury in the corresponding limb of someone depicted by the doll -RRB- .
Magic (paranormal).0035	Principle of contagion Another primary type of magical thinking includes the principle of contagion .
Magic (paranormal).0036	This principle suggests that once two objects come into contact with each other , they will continue to affect each other even after the contact between them has been broken .
Magic (paranormal).0037	One example that Tambiah gives is related to adoption .
Magic (paranormal).0038	Among some American Indians , for example , when a child is adopted his or her adoptive mother will pull the child through some of her clothes , symbolically representing the birth process and thereby associating the child with herself .
Magic (paranormal).0039	Therefore , the child emotionally becomes hers even though their relationship is not biological .
Magic (paranormal).0040	As Claude Lévi-Strauss would put it : the birth `` would consist , therefore , in making explicit a situation originally existing on the emotional level and in rendering acceptable to the mind pains which the body refuses to tolerate ... the woman believes in the myth and belongs to a society which believes in it . ''
Magic (paranormal).0041	Symbols , for many cultures that use magic , are seen as a type of technology .
Magic (paranormal).0042	Natives might use symbols and symbolic actions to bring about change and improvements , much like Western cultures might use advanced irrigation techniques to promote soil fertility and crop growth .
Magic (paranormal).0043	Michael Brown discusses the use of nantag stones among the Aguaruna as being similar to this type of `` technology . ''
Magic (paranormal).0044	These stones are brought into contact with stem cuttings of plants like manioc before they are planted in an effort to promote growth .
Magic (paranormal).0045	Nantag are powerful tangible symbols of fertility , so they are brought into contact with crops to transmit their fertility to the plants .
Magic (paranormal).0046	Others argue that ritualistic actions are merely therapeutic .
Magic (paranormal).0047	Tambiah cites the example of a native hitting the ground with a stick .
Magic (paranormal).0048	While some may interpret this action as symbolic -LRB- i.e. the man is trying to make the ground yield crops through force -RRB- , others would simply see a man unleashing his frustration at poor crop returns .
Magic (paranormal).0049	Ultimately , whether or not an action is symbolic depends upon the context of the situation as well as the ontology of the culture .
Magic (paranormal).0050	Many symbolic actions are derived from mythology and unique associations , whereas other ritualistic actions are just simple expressions of emotion and are not intended to enact any type of change .
Magic (paranormal).0051	Magical language The performance of magic almost always involves the use of language .
Magic (paranormal).0052	Whether spoken out loud or unspoken , words are frequently used to access or guide magical power .
Magic (paranormal).0053	In `` The Magical Power of Words '' -LRB- 1968 -RRB- S. J. Tambiah argues that the connection between language and magic is due to a belief in the inherent ability of words to influence the universe .
Magic (paranormal).0054	Bronisław Malinowski , in Coral Gardens and their Magic -LRB- 1935 -RRB- , suggests that this belief is an extension of man 's basic use of language to describe his surroundings , in which `` the knowledge of the right words , appropriate phrases and the more highly developed forms of speech , gives man a power over and above his own limited field of personal action . ''
Magic (paranormal).0055	Magical speech is therefore a ritual act and is of equal or even greater importance to the performance of magic than non-verbal acts .
Magic (paranormal).0056	Not all speech is considered magical .
Magic (paranormal).0057	Only certain words and phrases or words spoken in a specific context are considered to have magical power .
Magic (paranormal).0058	Magical language , according to C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards 's -LRB- 1923 -RRB- categories of speech , is distinct from scientific language because it is emotive and it converts words into symbols for emotions ; whereas in scientific language words are tied to specific meanings and refer to an objective external reality .
Magic (paranormal).0059	Magical language is therefore particularly adept at constructing metaphors that establish symbols and link magical rituals to the world .
Magic (paranormal).0060	Malinowski argues that `` the language of magic is sacred , set and used for an entirely different purpose to that of ordinary life . ''
Magic (paranormal).0061	The two forms of language are differentiated through word choice , grammar , style , or by the use of specific phrases or forms : spells , songs , blessings , or chants , for example .
Magic (paranormal).0062	Sacred modes of language often employ archaic words and forms in an attempt to invoke the purity or `` truth '' of a religious or a cultural `` golden age '' .
Magic (paranormal).0063	The use of Hebrew in Judaism is an example .
Magic (paranormal).0064	Another potential source of the power of words is their secrecy and exclusivity .
Magic (paranormal).0065	Much sacred language is differentiated enough from common language that it is incomprehensible to the majority of the population and it can only be used and interpreted by specialized practitioners -LRB- magicians , priests , shamans , even mullahs -RRB- .
Magic (paranormal).0066	In this respect , Tambiah argues that magical languages violate the primary function of language : communication .
Magic (paranormal).0067	Yet adherents of magic are still able to use and to value the magical function of words by believing in the inherent power of the words themselves and in the meaning that they must provide for those who do understand them .
Magic (paranormal).0068	This leads Tambiah to conclude that `` the remarkable disjunction between sacred and profane language which exists as a general fact is not necessarily linked to the need to embody sacred words in an exclusive language . ''
Magic (paranormal).0069	Magicians A magician is any practitioner of magic ; therefore a magician may be a specialist or a common practitioner , even if he or she does not consider himself a magician .
Magic (paranormal).0070	Magical knowledge is usually passed down from one magician to another through family or apprenticeships , though in some cultures it may also be purchased .
Magic (paranormal).0071	The information transferred usually consists of instructions on how to perform a variety of rituals , manipulate magical objects , or how to appeal to gods or to other supernatural forces .
Magic (paranormal).0072	Magical knowledge is often well guarded , as it is a valuable commodity to which each magician believes that he has a proprietary right .
Magic (paranormal).0073	Yet the possession of magical knowledge alone may be insufficient to grant magical power ; often a person must also possess certain magical objects , traits or life experiences in order to be a magician .
Magic (paranormal).0074	Among the Azande , for example , in order to question an oracle a man must have both the physical oracle -LRB- poison , or a washboard , for example -RRB- and knowledge of the words and the rites needed to make the object function .
Magic (paranormal).0075	A variety of personal traits may be credited to magical power , though frequently they are associated with an unusual birth into the world .
Magic (paranormal).0076	For example , in 16th century Friuli , babies born with the caul were believed to be good witches , benandanti , who would engage evil witches in nighttime battles over the bounty of the next year 's crops .
Magic (paranormal).0077	Certain post-birth experiences may also be believed to convey magical power .
Magic (paranormal).0078	For example a person 's survival of a near-death illness may be taken as evidence of their power as a healer : in Bali a medium 's survival is proof of her association with a patron deity and therefore her ability to communicate with other gods and spirits .
Magic (paranormal).0079	Initiations are perhaps the most commonly used ceremonies to establish and to differentiate magicians from common people .
Magic (paranormal).0080	In these rites the magician 's relationship to the supernatural and his entry into a closed professional class is established , often through rituals that simulate death and rebirth into a new life .
Magic (paranormal).0081	Given the exclusivity of the criteria needed to become a magician , much magic is performed by specialists .
Magic (paranormal).0082	Laypeople will likely have some simple magical rituals for everyday living , but in situations of particular importance , especially when health or major life events are concerned , a specialist magician will often be consulted .
Magic (paranormal).0083	The powers of both specialist and common magicians are determined by culturally accepted standards of the sources and the breadth of magic .
Magic (paranormal).0084	A magician may not simply invent or claim new magic ; the magician is only as powerful as his peers believe him to be .
Magic (paranormal).0085	In different cultures , various types of magicians may be differentiated based on their abilities , their sources of power , and on moral considerations , including divisions into different categories like sorcerer , witch , healer and others .
Magic (paranormal).0086	Witchcraft In non-scientific societies , perceived magical attack is an idea sometimes employed to explain personal or societal misfortune .
Magic (paranormal).0087	In anthropological and historical contexts this is often termed witchcraft or sorcery , and the perceived attackers ` witches ' or ` sorcerers ' .
Magic (paranormal).0088	Their maleficium is often seen as a biological trait or an acquired skill .
Magic (paranormal).0089	Known members of the community may be accused as witches , or the witches may be perceived as supernatural , non-human entities .
Magic (paranormal).0090	In early modern Europe and Britain such accusations led to the executions of tens of thousands of people , who were seen to be in league with Satan .
Magic (paranormal).0091	Those accused of being satanic ` witches ' were often practitioners of -LRB- usually benign -RRB- folk magic , and the English term ` witch ' was also sometimes used without its pejorative sense to describe such practitioners .
Magic (paranormal).0092	Theories Anthropological and psychological origins Definitions of relevant terminology The foremost perspectives on magic in anthropology are functionalist , symbolist and intellectualist .
Magic (paranormal).0093	These three perspectives are used to describe how magic works in a society .
Magic (paranormal).0094	The functionalist perspective , usually associated with Bronisław Malinowski , maintains that all aspects of society are meaningful and interrelated .
Magic (paranormal).0095	In the functionalist perspective , magic performs a latent function in the society .
Magic (paranormal).0096	The symbolist perspective researches the subtle meaning in rituals and myths that define a society and deals with questions of theodicy -- why do bad things happen to good people .
Magic (paranormal).0097	Finally the intellectualist perspective , associated with Edward Burnett Tylor and Sir James Frazer , regard magic as logical , but based on a flawed understanding of the world .
Magic (paranormal).0098	Magical thinking The term ` magical thinking ' in anthropology , psychology , and cognitive science refers to causal reasoning often involving associative thinking , such as the perceived ability of the mind to affect the physical world -LRB- see the philosophical problem of mental causation -RRB- or correlation mistaken for materialist causation .
Magic (paranormal).0099	Perceived causal associations between actions or events may derive from symbolic associations such as metaphor , metonym , `` As above , so below '' from Hermeticism and apparent synchronicity -LRB- coincidental magic -RRB- .
Magic (paranormal).0100	Psychological theories of magic Psychological theories treat magic as a personal phenomenon intended to meet individual needs , as opposed to a social phenomenon serving a collective purpose .
Magic (paranormal).0101	The explanatory power of magic should not be underestimated , however .
Magic (paranormal).0102	Both in the past and in the modern world magical belief systems can provide explanations for otherwise difficult or impossible to understand phenomena while providing a spiritual and metaphysical grounding for the individual .
Magic (paranormal).0103	Furthermore , as both Brian Feltham and Scott E. Hendrix argue , magical beliefs need not represent a form of irrationality , nor should they be viewed as incompatible with modern views of the world .
Magic (paranormal).0104	Intellectualist perspectives The belief that one can influence supernatural powers , by prayer , sacrifice or invocation goes back to prehistoric religion and is present in early records such as the Egyptian pyramid texts and the Indian Vedas .
Magic (paranormal).0105	James George Frazer asserted that magical observations are the result of an internal dysfunction : `` Men mistook the order of their ideas for the order of nature , and hence imagined that the control which they have , or seem to have , over their thoughts , permitted them to exercise a corresponding control over things . ''
Magic (paranormal).0106	Others , such as N. W. Thomas and Sigmund Freud have rejected this explanation .
Magic (paranormal).0107	Freud explains that `` the associated theory of magic merely explains the paths along which magic proceeds ; it does not explain its true essence , namely the misunderstanding which leads it to replace the laws of nature by psychological ones '' .
Magic (paranormal).0108	Freud emphasizes that what led primitive men to come up with magic is the power of wishes : `` His wishes are accompanied by a motor impulse , the will , which is later destined to alter the whole face of the earth in order to satisfy his wishes .
Magic (paranormal).0109	This motor impulse is at first employed to give a representation of the satisfying situation in such a way that it becomes possible to experience the satisfaction by means of what might be described as motor hallucinations .
Magic (paranormal).0110	This kind of representation of a satisfied wish is quite comparable to children 's play , which succeeds their earlier purely sensory technique of satisfaction .
Magic (paranormal).0111	-LSB- ... -RSB- As time goes on , the psychological accent shifts from the motives for the magical act on to the measures by which it is carried out -- that is , on to the act itself .
Magic (paranormal).0112	-LSB- ... -RSB- It thus comes to appear as though it is the magical act itself which , owing to its similarity with the desired result , alone determines the occurrence of that result . ''
Magic (paranormal).0113	Theories on the relationship of magic , science , art and religion Magic and religion are categories of beliefs and systems of knowledge used within societies .
Magic (paranormal).0114	While generally considered distinct categories in western cultures , the interactions , similarities , and differences have been central to the study of magic for many theorists in sociology and anthropology , including Frazer , Mauss , S. J. Tambiah , Malinowski , Michael Nevin and Isabelle Sarginson .
Magic (paranormal).0115	From the intellectualist and functionalist perspectives , magic is often considered most analogous to science and technology .
Magic (paranormal).0116	Marcel Mauss In A General Theory of Magic , Marcel Mauss classifies magic as a social phenomenon , akin to religion and science , but yet a distinct category .
Magic (paranormal).0117	In practice , magic bears a strong resemblance to religion .
Magic (paranormal).0118	Both use similar types of rites , materials , social roles and relationships to accomplish aims and engender belief .
Magic (paranormal).0119	They both operate on similar principles , in particular those of consecration and sanctity of objects and places , interaction with supernatural powers mediated by an expert , employment of symbolism , sacrifice , purification and representation in rites , and the importance of tradition and continuation of knowledge .
Magic (paranormal).0120	Magic and religion also share a collective character and totality of belief .
Magic (paranormal).0121	The rules and powers of each are determined by the community 's ideals and beliefs and so may slowly evolve .
Magic (paranormal).0122	Additionally neither supports partial belief .
Magic (paranormal).0123	Belief in one aspect of the phenomena necessitates belief in the whole , and each incorporates structural loopholes to accommodate contradictions .
Magic (paranormal).0124	The distinction Mauss draws between religion and magic is both of sentiment and practice .
Magic (paranormal).0125	He portrays magic as an element of pre-modern societies and in many respects an antithesis of religion .
Magic (paranormal).0126	Magic is secretive and isolated , and rarely performed publicly in order to protect and to preserve occult knowledge .
Magic (paranormal).0127	Religion is predictable and prescribed and is usually performed openly in order to impart knowledge to the community .
Magic (paranormal).0128	While these two phenomena do share many ritual forms , Mauss concludes that `` a magical rite is any rite that does not play a part in organized cults .
Magic (paranormal).0129	It is private , secret , mysterious and approaches the limit of prohibited rite . ''
Magic (paranormal).0130	In practice , magic differs from religion in desired outcome .
Magic (paranormal).0131	Religion seeks to satisfy moral and metaphysical ends , while magic is a functional art which often seeks to accomplish tangible results .
Magic (paranormal).0132	In this respect magic resembles technology and science .
Magic (paranormal).0133	Belief in each is diffuse , universal , and removed from the origin of the practice .
Magic (paranormal).0134	Yet , the similarity between these social phenomena is limited , as science is based in experimentation and development , whereas magic is an `` a priori belief . ''
Magic (paranormal).0135	Mauss concludes that though magical beliefs and rites are most analogous to religion , magic remains a social phenomenon distinct from religion and science with its own characteristic rules , acts and aims .
Magic (paranormal).0136	S. J. Tambiah According to Stanley Tambiah , magic , science , and religion all have their own `` quality of rationality '' , and have been influenced by politics and ideology .
Magic (paranormal).0137	Tambiah also believes that the perceptions of these three ideas have evolved over time as a result of Western thought .
Magic (paranormal).0138	The lines of demarcation between these ideas depend upon the perspective of a variety of anthropologists , but Tambiah has his own opinions regarding magic , science , and religion .
Magic (paranormal).0139	According to Tambiah , religion is based on an organized community , and it is supposed to encompass all aspects of life .
Magic (paranormal).0140	In religion , man is obligated to an outside power and he is supposed to feel piety towards that power .
Magic (paranormal).0141	Religion is effective and attractive because it is generally exclusive and strongly personal .
Magic (paranormal).0142	Also , because religion affects all aspects of life , it is convenient in the sense that morality and notions of acceptable behavior are imposed by God and the supernatural .
Magic (paranormal).0143	Science , on the other hand , suggests a clear divide between nature and the supernatural , making its role far less all-encompassing than that of religion .
Magic (paranormal).0144	As opposed to religion , Tambiah suggests that mankind has a much more personal control over events .
Magic (paranormal).0145	Science , according to Tambiah , is `` a system of behavior by which man acquires mastery of the environment . ''
Magic (paranormal).0146	Whereas in religion nature and the supernatural are connected and essentially interchangeable , in science , nature and the supernatural are clearly separate spheres .
Magic (paranormal).0147	Also , science is a developed discipline ; a logical argument is created and can be challenged .
Magic (paranormal).0148	The base of scientific knowledge can be extended , while religion is more concrete and absolute .
Magic (paranormal).0149	Magic , the less accepted of the three disciplines in Western society , is an altogether unique idea .
Magic (paranormal).0150	Tambiah states that magic is a strictly ritualistic action that implements forces and objects outside the realm of the gods and the supernatural .
Magic (paranormal).0151	These objects and events are said to be intrinsically efficacious , so that the supernatural is unnecessary .
Magic (paranormal).0152	To some , including the Greeks , magic was considered a `` proto-science . ''
Magic (paranormal).0153	Magic has other historical importance as well .
Magic (paranormal).0154	Much of the debate between religion and magic originated during the Protestant Reformation .
Magic (paranormal).0155	The Catholic Church was attacked for its doctrine of transubstantiation because it was considered a type of sacramental magic .
Magic (paranormal).0156	Furthermore , the possibility of anything happening outside of God 's purpose was denied .
Magic (paranormal).0157	Spells were viewed as ineffective and blasphemous , because religion required belief in `` a conscious agent who could be deflected from this purpose by prayer and supplication . ''
Magic (paranormal).0158	Prayer was the only way to effectively enact positive change .
Magic (paranormal).0159	The Protestant Reformation was a significant moment in the history of magical thought because Protestantism provided the impetus for a systematic understanding of the world .
Magic (paranormal).0160	In this systematic framework , there was no room for magic and its practices .
Magic (paranormal).0161	Besides the Reformation , the Renaissance was an influential epoch in the history of thought concerning magic and science .
Magic (paranormal).0162	During the Renaissance , magic was less stigmatized even though it was done in secret and therefore considered `` occult '' .
Magic (paranormal).0163	Renaissance magic was based on cosmology , and its powers were said to be derived from the stars and the alignment of the planets .
Magic (paranormal).0164	Newton himself began his work in mathematics because he wanted to see `` whether judicial astrology had any claim to validity . ''
Magic (paranormal).0165	The lines of demarcation between science , magic , and religion all have origins dating to times when established thought processes were challenged .
Magic (paranormal).0166	The rise of Western thought essentially initiated the differentiation between the three disciplines .
Magic (paranormal).0167	Whereas science could be revised and developed through rational thought , magic was seen as less scientific and systematic than science and religion , making it the least respected of the three .
Magic (paranormal).0168	Bronisław Malinowski In his essay `` Magic , Science and Religion '' , Bronisław Malinowski contends that every person , no matter how primitive , uses both magic and science .
Magic (paranormal).0169	To make this distinction he breaks up this category into the `` sacred '' and the `` profane '' or `` magic/religion '' and science .
Magic (paranormal).0170	He theorizes that feelings of reverence and awe rely on observation of nature and a dependence on its regularity .
Magic (paranormal).0171	This observation and reasoning about nature is a type of science .
Magic (paranormal).0172	Magic and science both have definite aims to help `` human instincts , needs and pursuits . ''
Magic (paranormal).0173	Both magic and science develop procedures that must be followed to accomplish specific goals .
Magic (paranormal).0174	Magic and science are both based on knowledge ; magic is knowledge of the self and of emotion , while science is knowledge of nature .
Magic (paranormal).0175	According to Malinowski , magic and religion are also similar in that they often serve the same function in a society .
Magic (paranormal).0176	The difference is that magic is more about the personal power of the individual and religion is about faith in the power of God .
Magic (paranormal).0177	Magic is also something that is passed down over generations to a specific group while religion is more broadly available to the community .
Magic (paranormal).0178	To end his essay , Malinowski poses the question , `` why magic ? ''
Magic (paranormal).0179	He writes , `` Magic supplies primitive man with a number of ready-made rituals , acts and beliefs , with a definite mental and practical technique which serves to bridge over the dangerous gaps in every important pursuit or critical situation . ''
Magic (paranormal).0180	Robin Horton In `` African Traditional Thought and Western Science , '' Robin Horton compares the magical and religious thinking of non-modernized cultures with western scientific thought .
Magic (paranormal).0181	He argues that both traditional beliefs and western science are applications of `` theoretical thinking . ''
Magic (paranormal).0182	The common form , function , and purpose of these theoretical idioms are therefore structured and explained by eight main characteristics of this type of thought : # In all cultures the majority of human experience can be explained by common sense .
Magic (paranormal).0183	The purpose then of theory is to explain forces that operate behind and within the commonsense world .
Magic (paranormal).0184	Theory should impose order and reason on everyday life by attributing cause to a few select forces .
Magic (paranormal).0185	# Theories also help place events in a causal context that is greater than common sense alone can provide , because commonsense causation is inherently limited by what we see and experience .
Magic (paranormal).0186	Theoretical formulations are therefore used as intermediaries to link natural effects to natural causes .
Magic (paranormal).0187	# `` Common sense and theory have complementary roles in everyday life . ''
Magic (paranormal).0188	Common sense is more handy and useful for a wide range of everyday circumstances , but occasionally there are circumstances that can only be explained using a wider causal vision , so a jump to theory is made .
Magic (paranormal).0189	# `` Levels of theory vary with context . ''
Magic (paranormal).0190	There are widely and narrowly encompassing theories , and the individual can usually chose which to use in order to understand and explain a situation as is deemed appropriate .
Magic (paranormal).0191	# All theory breaks up aspects of commonsense events , abstracts them and then reintegrates them into the common usage and understanding .
Magic (paranormal).0192	# Theory is usually created by analogy between unexplained and familiar phenomena .
Magic (paranormal).0193	# When theory is based on analogy between explained and unexplained observations , `` generally only a limited aspect of the familiar phenomena is incorporated into -LRB- the -RRB- explanatory model '' .
Magic (paranormal).0194	It is this process of abstraction that contributes to the ability of theories to transcend commonsense explanation .
Magic (paranormal).0195	For example , gods have the quality of spirituality by omission of many common aspects of human life .
Magic (paranormal).0196	# Once a theoretical model has been established , it is often modified to explain contradictory data so that it may no longer represent the analogy on which is was based .
Magic (paranormal).0197	While both traditional beliefs and western science are based on theoretical thought , Horton argues that the differences between these knowledge systems in practice and form are due to their states in open and closed cultures .
Magic (paranormal).0198	He classifies scientifically oriented cultures as ` open ' because they are aware of other modes of thought , while traditional cultures are ` closed ' because they are unaware of alternatives to the established theories .
Magic (paranormal).0199	The varying sources of information in these systems results in differences in form which , Horton asserts , often blinds observers from seeing the similarities between the systems as two applications of theoretical thought .
Magic (paranormal).0200	Alan Moore Alan Moore says that magic is indistinguishable from art whether it be writing , music , sculpture , or any other form .
Magic (paranormal).0201	He supports his proposition by stating that magic is referred to in early texts simply as ` the art ' .
Magic (paranormal).0202	Also books of spells were referred to as ` grimoires ' in the past which is another way of saying ` grammar ' and to cast a spell means simply to spell .
Magic (paranormal).0203	Further he states that magic is simply the manipulation of symbols , words , or images , to achieve changes in consciousness .
Magic (paranormal).0204	History Ancient Egypt Egyptians believed that with Heka , the activation of the Ka , an aspect of the soul of both gods and humans , -LRB- and divine personification of magic -RRB- , they could influence the gods and gain protection , healing and transformation .
Magic (paranormal).0205	Health and wholeness of being were sacred to Heka .
Magic (paranormal).0206	There is no word for religion in the ancient Egyptian language as mundane and religious world views were not distinct ; thus , Heka was not a secular practice but rather a religious observance .
Magic (paranormal).0207	Every aspect of life , every word , plant , animal and ritual was connected to the power and authority of the gods .
Magic (paranormal).0208	In ancient Egypt , magic consisted of four components ; the primeval potency that empowered the creator-god was identified with Heka , who was accompanied by magical rituals known as Seshaw held within sacred texts called Rw .
Magic (paranormal).0209	In addition Pekhret , medicinal prescriptions , were given to patients to bring relief .
Magic (paranormal).0210	This magic was used in temple rituals as well as informal situations by priests .
Magic (paranormal).0211	These rituals , along with medical practices , formed an integrated therapy for both physical and spiritual health .
Magic (paranormal).0212	Magic was also used for protection against the angry deities , jealous ghosts , foreign demons and sorcerers who were thought to cause illness , accidents , poverty and infertility .
Magic (paranormal).0213	Temple priests used wands during magical rituals .
Magic (paranormal).0214	Mesopotamia In parts of Mesopotamian religion , magic was believed in and actively practiced .
Magic (paranormal).0215	At the city of Uruk , archaeologists have excavated houses dating from the 5th and 4th centuries BCE in which cuneiform clay tablets have been unearthed containing magical incantations .
Magic (paranormal).0216	Classical antiquity In ancient Greece magic was involved in practice of religion , medicine , and divination .
Magic (paranormal).0217	The Greek mystery religions had strongly magical components , and in Egypt , a large number of magical papyri , in Greek , Coptic , and Demotic , have been recovered .
Magic (paranormal).0218	They contain early instances of : * the use of `` magic words '' said to have the power to command spirits ; * the use of wands and other ritual tools ; * the use of a magic circle to defend the magician against the spirits that he is invoking or evoking ; and * the use of mysterious symbols or sigils which are thought to be useful when invoking or evoking spirits .
Magic (paranormal).0219	The practice of magic was banned in the Roman world , and the Codex Theodosianus states : If any wizard therefore or person imbued with magical contamination who is called by custom of the people a magician ... should be apprehended in my retinue , or in that of the Caesar , he shall not escape punishment and torture by the protection of his rank .
Magic (paranormal).0220	Middle Ages Several medieval scholars were considered to be magicians in popular legend , notably Gerbert d'Aurillac and Albertus Magnus : both men were active in the scientific research of their day as well as in ecclesiastical matters , which was enough to attach to them a nimbus of the occult .
Magic (paranormal).0221	Magical practice was actively discouraged by the church , but it remained widespread in folk religion throughout the medieval period .
Magic (paranormal).0222	The demonology and angelology contained in the earliest grimoires assume a life surrounded by Christian implements and sacred rituals .
Magic (paranormal).0223	The underlying theology in these works of Christian demonology encourages the magician to fortify himself with fasting , prayers , and sacraments , so that by using the holy names of God in the sacred languages , he could use divine powers to coerce demons into appearing and serving his usually lustful or avaricious magical goals .
Magic (paranormal).0224	13th century astrologers include Johannes de Sacrobosco and Guido Bonatti .
Magic (paranormal).0225	Renaissance Renaissance humanism saw resurgence in hermeticism and Neo-Platonic varieties of ceremonial magic .
Magic (paranormal).0226	The Renaissance , on the other hand , saw the rise of science , in such forms as the dethronement of the Ptolemaic theory of the universe , the distinction of astronomy from astrology , and of chemistry from alchemy .
Magic (paranormal).0227	The seven artes magicae or artes prohibitae or arts prohibited by canon law by Johannes Hartlieb in 1456 were : nigromancy -LRB- which included `` black magic '' and `` demonology '' -RRB- , geomancy , hydromancy , aeromancy , pyromancy , chiromancy , and scapulimancy and their sevenfold partition emulated the artes liberales and artes mechanicae .
Magic (paranormal).0228	Both bourgeoisie and nobility in the 15th and 16th century showed great fascination with these arts , which exerted an exotic charm by their ascription to Arabic , Jewish , Gypsy and Egyptian sources .
Magic (paranormal).0229	There was great uncertainty in distinguishing practices of superstition , occultism , and perfectly sound scholarly knowledge or pious ritual .
Magic (paranormal).0230	The intellectual and spiritual tensions erupted in the Early Modern witch craze , further reinforced by the turmoil of the Protestant Reformation , especially in Germany , England , and Scotland .
Magic (paranormal).0231	Baroque Study of the occult arts remained intellectually respectable well into the 17th century , and only gradually divided into the modern categories of natural science , occultism , and superstition .
Magic (paranormal).0232	The 17th century saw the gradual rise of the `` age of reason '' , while belief in witchcraft and sorcery , and consequently the irrational surge of Early Modern witch trials , receded , a process only completed at the end of the Baroque period circa 1730 .
Magic (paranormal).0233	Christian Thomasius still met opposition as he argued in his 1701 Dissertatio de crimine magiae that it was meaningless to make dealing with the devil a criminal offence , since it was impossible to really commit the crime in the first place .
Magic (paranormal).0234	In Britain , the Witchcraft Act of 1735 established that people could not be punished for consorting with spirits , while would-be magicians pretending to be able to invoke spirits could still be fined as con artists .
Magic (paranormal).0235	`` Newton was not the first of the age of reason , he was the last of the magicians . ''
Magic (paranormal).0236	-- John Maynard Keynes Romanticism From 1776 to 1781 AD , Jacob Philadelphia performed feats of magic , sometimes under the guise of scientific exhibitions , throughout Europe and Russia .
Magic (paranormal).0237	Baron Carl Reichenbach 's experiments with his Odic force appeared to be an attempt to bridge the gap between magic and science .
Magic (paranormal).0238	More recent periods of renewed interest in magic occurred around the end of the 19th century , where Symbolism and other offshoots of Romanticism cultivated a renewed interest in exotic spiritualities .
Magic (paranormal).0239	European colonialism put Westerners in contact with India and Egypt and re-introduced exotic beliefs .
Magic (paranormal).0240	Hindu and Egyptian mythology frequently feature in 19th century magical texts .
Magic (paranormal).0241	The late 19th century spawned a large number of magical organizations , including the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn , the Theosophical Society , and specifically magical variants on Freemasonry .
Magic (paranormal).0242	The Golden Dawn represented perhaps the peak of this wave of magic , attracting cultural celebrities like William Butler Yeats , Algernon Blackwood , and Arthur Machen .
Magic (paranormal).0243	In cultural contexts Animism and folk religion Appearing in various tribal peoples from Aboriginal Australia and Māori New Zealand to the Amazon , African savannah , and pagan Europe , some form of shamanic contact with the spirit world seems to be nearly universal in the early development of human communities .
Magic (paranormal).0244	Much of the Babylonian and Egyptian pictorial writing characters appear derived from the same sources .
Magic (paranormal).0245	Although indigenous magical traditions persist to this day , very early on some communities transitioned from nomadic to agricultural civilizations , and with this shift , the development of spiritual life mirrored that of civic life .
Magic (paranormal).0246	Just as tribal elders were consolidated and transformed into kings and bureaucrats , so too were shamans and adepts changed into priests and a priestly caste .
Magic (paranormal).0247	This shift is by no means in nomenclature alone .
Magic (paranormal).0248	While the shaman 's task was to negotiate between the tribe and the spirit world , on behalf of the tribe , as directed by the collective will of the tribe , the priest 's role was to transfer instructions from the deities to the city-state , on behalf of the deities , as directed by the will of those deities .
Magic (paranormal).0249	This shift represents the first major usurpation of power by distancing magic from those participating in that magic .
Magic (paranormal).0250	It is at this stage of development that highly codified and elaborate rituals , setting the stage for formal religions , began to emerge , such as the funeral rites of the Egyptians and the sacrifice rituals of the Babylonians , Persians , Aztecs and Mayans .
Magic (paranormal).0251	In 2003 , Sinafasi Makelo , a representative of Mbuti pygmies , told the UN 's Indigenous People 's Forum that during the Congo Civil War , his people were hunted down and eaten as though they were game animals .
Magic (paranormal).0252	Both sides of the war regarded them as `` subhuman '' and some say their flesh can confer magical powers .
Magic (paranormal).0253	On April , 2008 , Kinshasa , the police arrested 14 suspected victims -LRB- of penis snatching -RRB- and sorcerers accused of using black magic or witchcraft to steal -LRB- make disappear -RRB- or shrink men 's penises to extort cash for cure , amid a wave of panic .
Magic (paranormal).0254	Arrests were made in an effort to avoid bloodshed seen in Ghana a decade ago , when 12 alleged penis snatchers were beaten to death by mobs .
Magic (paranormal).0255	Native American medicine The Shamanism practiced by the indigenous peoples of the Americas was called `` medicine '' and was practiced by medicine men .
Magic (paranormal).0256	In addition to healing , medicine served many other purposes , for example among the Cheyenne , one of Plains Indians that lived in the Great Plains of North America , medicine such as war paint , war shields , war shirts , and war bonnets , such as the famous war bonnet of Roman Nose , served to protect a warrior from wounding during battle .
Magic (paranormal).0257	Magic in Hinduism The Atharva Veda is a veda that deals with mantras that can be used for both good and bad .
Magic (paranormal).0258	The word mantrik in India literally means `` magician '' since the mantrik usually knows mantras , spells , and curses which can be used for or against all forms of magic .
Magic (paranormal).0259	Tantra is likewise employed for ritual magic by the tantrik .
Magic (paranormal).0260	Many ascetics after long periods of penance and meditation are alleged to attain a state where they may utilize supernatural powers .
Magic (paranormal).0261	However , many say that they choose not to use them and instead focus on transcending beyond physical power into the realm of spirituality .
Magic (paranormal).0262	Many siddhars are said to have performed miracles that would ordinarily be impossible to perform .
Magic (paranormal).0263	Western magic In general , the 20th century has seen a sharp rise in public interest in various forms of magical practice , and the foundation of a number of traditions and organisations , ranging from the distinctly religious to the philosophical .
Magic (paranormal).0264	In England , a further revival of interest in magic was heralded by the repeal of the last Witchcraft Act in 1951 .
Magic (paranormal).0265	In 1954 Gerald Gardner published a book , Witchcraft Today , in which he claimed to reveal the existence of a witch-cult that dated back to pre-Christian Europe .
Magic (paranormal).0266	Although many of Gardner 's claims have since come under intensive criticism from sources both within and without the Neopagan community , his works remain the most important founding stone of Wicca .
Magic (paranormal).0267	Gardner 's newly created religion , and many others , took off in the atmosphere of the 1960s and 1970s , when the counterculture of the hippies also spawned another period of renewed interest in magic , divination , and other occult practices .
Magic (paranormal).0268	The various branches of Neopaganism and other Earth religions that have emerged since Gardner 's publication tend to follow a pattern in combining the practice of magic and religion , although this combination is not exclusive to them .
Magic (paranormal).0269	Following the trend of magic associated with counterculture , some feminists launched an independent revival of goddess worship .
Magic (paranormal).0270	This brought them into contact with the Gardnerian tradition of magical religion -LRB- or religious magic -RRB- , and deeply influenced that tradition in return .
Magic (paranormal).0271	Some people in the West believe in or practice various forms of magic .
Magic (paranormal).0272	The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn , Aleister Crowley 's Thelema and their subsequent offshoots , influenced by Eliphas Levi , are most commonly associated with the resurgence of magical tradition in the English speaking world of the 20th century .
Magic (paranormal).0273	Other , similar resurgences took place at roughly the same time , centered in France and Germany .
Magic (paranormal).0274	The western traditions acknowledging the natural elements , the seasons , and the practitioner 's relationship with the Earth , Gaia , or a primary Goddess have derived at least in part from these magical groups , as found in Neopagan religions and various forms of contemporary paganism .
Magic (paranormal).0275	Allegedly for gematric reasons Aleister Crowley preferred the spelling magick , defining it as `` the science and art of causing change to occur in conformity with the will . ''
Magic (paranormal).0276	By this , he included `` mundane '' acts of change as well as ritual magic .
Magic (paranormal).0277	In Magick in Theory and Practice , Chapter XIV , Crowley says : What is a Magical Operation ?
Magic (paranormal).0278	It may be defined as any event in nature which is brought to pass by Will .
Magic (paranormal).0279	We must not exclude potato-growing or banking from our definition .
Magic (paranormal).0280	Let us take a very simple example of a Magical Act : that of a man blowing his nose .
Magic (paranormal).0281	Western magical traditions include hermetic magic and its many offshoots predominantly inspired by the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn , as well as Wicca and some other Neopagan religions and contemporary forms of paganism .
Magic (paranormal).0282	Definitions , concepts and uses of magic tend to vary even within magical traditions and indeed often between individuals .
Magic (paranormal).0283	Wicca is one of the more publicly known traditions within Neopaganism , a magical religion inspired by medieval witchcraft , with influences including the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn and Crowley .
Magic (paranormal).0284	Ruickbie -LRB- 2004:193 -209 -RRB- shows that Wiccans and witches define magic in many different ways and use it for a number of different purposes .
Magic (paranormal).0285	Despite that diversity of opinion , he concludes that the result upon the practitioner is generally perceived as a positive one .
Magic (paranormal).0286	The belief in magic is often considered superstitious , although it could be argued that some magical practices rely upon widely accepted psychological principles and are only intended to promote internal personal changes within the practitioner themselves .
Magic (paranormal).0287	Visualization techniques , for instance , widely used by magicians , are also used in somewhat different contexts in fields such as clinical psychology and sports training .
Magic (paranormal).0288	Theories of adherents Adherents to magic believe that it may work by one or more of the following basic principles : * A mystical force or energy that is natural , but can not be detected by science at present , and which may not be detectable at all .
Magic (paranormal).0289	Common terms referring to such magical energy include mana , numen , chi or kundalini .
Magic (paranormal).0290	These are sometimes regarded as fluctuations of an underlying primary substance -LRB- akasha , aether -RRB- that is present in all things and interconnects and binds all .
Magic (paranormal).0291	Magical energy is thus also present in all things , though it can be especially concentrated in magical objects .
Magic (paranormal).0292	Magical energies are typically seen as being especially responsive to the use of symbols , so that a person , event or object can be affected by manipulating an object that symbolically represents them or it -LRB- as in sigil magic , for instance -RRB- .
Magic (paranormal).0293	This corresponds to James Frazer 's theory of sympathetic magic .
Magic (paranormal).0294	* Intervention of spirits , similar to hypothetical natural forces , but with their own consciousness and intelligence .
Magic (paranormal).0295	Believers in spirits will often describe a whole cosmos of beings of many different kinds , sometimes organized into a hierarchy .
Magic (paranormal).0296	* Manipulation of the Elements , by using the will of the magician and symbols or objects which are representative of the element -LRB- s -RRB- .
Magic (paranormal).0297	Western practitioners typically use the Classical elements of Earth , Air , Water , and Fire .
Magic (paranormal).0298	* Concentration or meditation .
Magic (paranormal).0299	A certain amount of focusing or restricting the mind to some imagined object -LRB- or will -RRB- , according to Aleister Crowley , produces mystical attainment or `` an occurrence in the brain characterized essentially by the uniting of subject and object '' -LRB- Book Four , Part 1 : Mysticism -RRB- .
Magic (paranormal).0300	Magic , as defined previously , seeks to aid concentration by constantly recalling the attention to the chosen object -LRB- or Will -RRB- , thereby producing said attainment .
Magic (paranormal).0301	For example , if one wishes to concentrate on a god , one might memorize a system of correspondences -LRB- perhaps chosen arbitrarily , as this would not affect its usefulness for mystical purposes -RRB- and then make every object that one sees `` correspond '' to said god .
Magic (paranormal).0302	Aleister Crowley wrote that '' ... the exaltation of the mind by means of magickal practices leads -LRB- as one may say , in spite of itself -RRB- to the same results as occur in straightforward Yoga . ''
Magic (paranormal).0303	Crowley 's magick thus becomes a form of mental , mystical , or spiritual discipline , designed to train the mind to achieve greater concentration .
Magic (paranormal).0304	Crowley also made claims for the paranormal effects of magick , suggesting a connection with the first principle in this list .
Magic (paranormal).0305	However , he defined any attempt to use this power for a purpose other than aiding mental or mystical attainment as `` black magick '' .
Magic (paranormal).0306	* The magical power of the subconscious mind .
Magic (paranormal).0307	To believers who think that they need to convince their subconscious mind to make the changes that they desire , all spirits and energies are projections and symbols that make sense to the subconscious .
Magic (paranormal).0308	A variant of this belief is that the subconscious is capable of contacting spirits , who in turn can work magic .
Magic (paranormal).0309	* The Oneness of All .
Magic (paranormal).0310	Based on the fundamental concepts of monism and Non-duality , this philosophy holds that Magic is little more than the application of one 's own inherent unity with the universe .
Magic (paranormal).0311	Hinging upon the personal realization , or `` illumination '' , that the self is limitless , one may live in unison with nature , seeking and preserving balance in all things .
Magic (paranormal).0312	Many more theories exist .
Magic (paranormal).0313	Practitioners will often mix these concepts , and sometimes even invent some themselves .
Magic (paranormal).0314	In the contemporary current of chaos magic in particular , it is not unusual to believe that any concept of magic works .
Magic (paranormal).0315	Key principles of utilizing Magic are often said to be Concentration and Visualization .
Magic (paranormal).0316	Many of those who purportedly cast spells attain a mental state called the `` Trance State '' to enable the spell .
Magic (paranormal).0317	The Trance State is often described as an emptying of the mind , akin to meditation .
Magic (paranormal).0318	Magic and monotheism Officially , Christianity and Islam characterize magic as forbidden witchcraft , and have often prosecuted alleged practitioners of it with varying degrees of severity .
Magic (paranormal).0319	Other religions , such as Judaism and Zoroastrianism have rather more ambiguous positions towards it .
Magic (paranormal).0320	Trends in monotheistic thought have dismissed all such manifestations as trickery and illusion , nothing more than dishonest gimmicks .
Magic (paranormal).0321	In Judaism In Judaism the Torah prohibits Jews from being superstitious or engaging in astrology -LRB- Lev .
Magic (paranormal).0322	19 , 26 -RRB- ; from muttering incantations -LRB- Deut .
Magic (paranormal).0323	18 , 11 -RRB- ; from consulting an ov -LRB- mediums -RRB- , yidoni -LRB- seers -RRB- , or attempting to contact the dead -LRB- Deut .
Magic (paranormal).0324	18 , 11 -RRB- ; from going into a trance to foresee events , and from performing acts of magic -LRB- Deut .
Magic (paranormal).0325	18 , 10 -RRB- .
Magic (paranormal).0326	See 613 Mitzvot .
Magic (paranormal).0327	The general theme of these commandments is a prohibition to channel and utilise forces of impurity for personal gain .
Magic (paranormal).0328	That is , a prohibition against practicing Black Magic .
Magic (paranormal).0329	A different type of magic can be achieved using knowledge of the kabbalah .
Magic (paranormal).0330	Because the kabbalah provides knowledge of the spiritual and conceptual underpinnings of physical existence , one who possesses kabbalistic knowledge is able to produce physical effects by directly addressing the spiritual basis of the affected physical object .
Magic (paranormal).0331	This is called ` practical kabbalah ' and is a type of White Magic .
Magic (paranormal).0332	The practice of practical kabbalah was banned by the Vilna Gaon due to the decreasing spiritual sensitivity of later generations .
Magic (paranormal).0333	In Christianity Magia was viewed with suspicion by Christianity from the time of the Church fathers .
Magic (paranormal).0334	It was , however , never completely settled whether there may be permissible practices , e.g. involving relics or holy water as opposed to `` blasphemous '' necromancy -LRB- necromantia -RRB- involving the invocation of demons -LRB- goetia -RRB- .
Magic (paranormal).0335	The distinction became particularly pointed and controversial during the Early Modern witch-hunts , with some authors such as Johannes Hartlieb denouncing all magical practice as blasphemous , while others portrayed natural magic as not sinful .
Magic (paranormal).0336	The position taken by Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa , one of the foremost Renaissance magicians , is ambiguous .
Magic (paranormal).0337	The character of Faustus , likely based on a historical 16th century magician or charlatan , became the prototypical popular tale of a learned magician who succumbs to a pact with the devil .
Magic (paranormal).0338	The current Catechism of the Catholic Church discusses divination and magic under the heading of the First Commandment .
Magic (paranormal).0339	It is careful to allow for the possibility of divinely inspired prophecy , but it rejects `` all forms of divination '' : -LRB- 2116 -RRB- All forms of divination are to be rejected : recourse to Satan or demons , conjuring up the dead or other practices falsely supposed to `` unveil '' the future .
Magic (paranormal).0340	Consulting horoscopes , astrology , palm reading , interpretation of omens and lots , the phenomena of clairvoyance , and recourse to mediums all conceal a desire for power over time , history , and , in the last analysis , other human beings , as well as a wish to conciliate hidden powers .
Magic (paranormal).0341	They contradict the honor , respect , and loving fear that we owe to God alone .
Magic (paranormal).0342	The section on `` practices of magic or sorcery '' is less absolute , specifying `` attempts to tame occult powers '' in order to `` have supernatural power over others '' .
Magic (paranormal).0343	Such are denounced as `` gravely contrary to the virtue of religion '' , notably avoiding a statement on whether such attempts can have any actual effect -LRB- that is , attempts to employ occult practices are identified as violating the First Commandment because they in themselves betray a lack of faith , and not because they may or may not result in the desired effect -RRB- .
Magic (paranormal).0344	The Catechism expresses skepticism towards widespread practices of folk Catholicism without outlawing them explicitly : -LRB- 2117 -RRB- -LSB- ... -RSB- Wearing charms is also reprehensible .
Magic (paranormal).0345	Spiritism often implies divination or magical practices ; the Church for her part warns the faithful against it .
Magic (paranormal).0346	Recourse to so-called traditional cures does not justify either the invocation of evil powers or the exploitation of another 's credulity .
Magic (paranormal).0347	Some argue that the recent popularity of the prosperity gospel constitutes a return to magical thinking within Christianity .
Magic (paranormal).0348	Note also that Gnostic Christianity has a strong mystical current , but shies away from practical magic and focuses more on theurgy .
Magic (paranormal).0349	In Islam Any discussion of Muslim magic poses a double set of problems .
Magic (paranormal).0350	On the one hand , like its counterpart in predominantly Christian cultures , magic is forbidden by orthodox leaders and legal opinions .
Magic (paranormal).0351	On the other hand , translating various Arabic terms as ` magic ' causes another set of problems with no clear answers .
Magic (paranormal).0352	As with any question regarding the behavior of Muslims in relation to authorized practices , theological decisions begin by consulting the Qur ' an .
Magic (paranormal).0353	The second chapter introduces an explanation for the introduction of magic into the world : They followed what the evil ones gave out -LRB- falsely -RRB- against the power of Solomon : the blasphemers were , not Solomon , but the evil ones , teaching men magic , and such things as came down at Babylon to the angels Harut and Marut .
Magic (paranormal).0354	But neither of these taught anyone -LRB- such things -RRB- without saying : `` We are only for trial ; so do not blaspheme . ''
Magic (paranormal).0355	They learned from them the means to sow discord between man and wife .
Magic (paranormal).0356	But they could not thus harm anyone except by Allah 's permission .
Magic (paranormal).0357	And they learned what harmed them , not what profited them .
Magic (paranormal).0358	And they knew that the buyers of -LRB- magic -RRB- would have no share in the happiness of the Hereafter .
Magic (paranormal).0359	And vile was the price for which they did sell their souls , if they but knew !
Magic (paranormal).0360	-LRB- Q 2:102 -RRB- .
Magic (paranormal).0361	Though it presents a generally contemptuous attitude towards magic -LRB- Muhammad was accused by his detractors of being a magician -RRB- , the Qur ' an distinguishes between apparent magic -LRB- miracles sanctioned by Allah -RRB- and real magic .
Magic (paranormal).0362	The first is that used by Solomon , who being a prophet of Allah , is assumed to have used miraculous powers with Allah 's blessing .
Magic (paranormal).0363	Muslims also believe that Allah made an army of Djinn obedient to him .
Magic (paranormal).0364	The second form is the magic that was taught by the `` evil ones '' , or al-shayatin .
Magic (paranormal).0365	Al-shayatin has two meanings ; the first is similar to the Christian Satan .
Magic (paranormal).0366	The second meaning , which is the one used here , refers to a djinn of superior power .
Magic (paranormal).0367	The al-shayatin taught knowledge of evil and `` pretended to force the laws of nature and the will of Allah ... '' According to this belief , those who follow this path turn themselves from Allah and can not reach heaven .
Magic (paranormal).0368	The Arabic word translated in this passage as `` magic '' is sihr .
Magic (paranormal).0369	The etymological meaning of sihr suggests that `` it is the turning ... of a thing from its true nature ... or form ... to something else which is unreal or a mere appearance ... '' By the first millennium CE , sihr became a fully developed system in Islamic society .
Magic (paranormal).0370	Within this system , all magicians `` assert -LSB- ed -RSB- that magic is worked by the obedience of spirits to the magician . ''
Magic (paranormal).0371	The efficacy of this system comes from the belief that every Arabic letter , every word , verse , and chapter in the Qur ' an , every month , day , time and name were created by Allah a priori , and that each has an angel and a djinn servant .
Magic (paranormal).0372	It is through the knowledge of the names of these servants that an actor is able to control the angel and djinn for his or her purposes .
Magic (paranormal).0373	The Sunni and Shia sects of Islam typically forbid all use of magic .
Magic (paranormal).0374	The Sufis within these two sects are much more ambiguous about its use as seen in the concept of `` Barakah '' .
Magic (paranormal).0375	If magic is understood in terms of Frazer 's principle of contagion , then barakah is another term that can refer to magic .
Magic (paranormal).0376	Barakah , variously defined as `` blessing '' , or `` divine power '' , is a quality one possesses rather than a category of activity .
Magic (paranormal).0377	According to Muslim conception , the source of barakah is solely from Allah ; it is Allah 's direct blessing and intervention conferred upon special , pious Muslims .
Magic (paranormal).0378	Barakah has a heavily contagious quality in that one can transfer it by either inheritance or contact .
Magic (paranormal).0379	Of all the humans who have ever lived , it is said that the Prophet Muhammad possessed the greatest amount of barakah and that he passed this to his male heirs through his daughter Fatima .
Magic (paranormal).0380	Barakah is not just limited to Muhammad 's family line ; any person who is considered holy may also possess it and transfer it to virtually anyone else .
Magic (paranormal).0381	In Morocco , barakah transfer can be accomplished by sharing a piece of bread from which the possessor has eaten because saliva is the vessel of barakah in the human body .
Magic (paranormal).0382	However , the transference of barakah may also occur against the will of its possessor through other forms of physical contact such as hand shaking and kissing .
Magic (paranormal).0383	The contagious element of barakah is not limited to humans as it can be found in rocks , trees , water , and even in some animals , such as horses .
Magic (paranormal).0384	Just how the actor maintained obedience depended upon the benevolence or malevolence of his practice .
Magic (paranormal).0385	Malevolent magicians operated by enslaving the spirits through offerings and deeds displeasing to Allah .
Magic (paranormal).0386	Benevolent magicians , in contrast , obeyed and appeased Allah so that Allah exercised His will upon the spirits .
Magic (paranormal).0387	Al-Buni provides the process by which this practice occurs : First : the practitioner must be of utterly clean soul and garb .
Magic (paranormal).0388	Second , when the proper angel is contacted , this angel will first get permission from God to go to the aid of the person who summoned him .
Magic (paranormal).0389	Third : the practitioner `` must not apply ... -LSB- his power -RSB- except to that purpose -LSB- i.e. to achieve goals -RSB- which would please God . ''
Magic (paranormal).0390	However , not all Islamic groups accept this explanation of benevolent magic .
Magic (paranormal).0391	The Salafis particularly view this as shirk , denying the unity of Allah .
Magic (paranormal).0392	Consequently , the Salafis renounce appellations to intermediaries such as saints , angels , and djinn , and renounce magic , fortune-telling , and divination .
Magic (paranormal).0393	This particular brand of magic has also been condemned as forbidden by a fatwa issued by Al-Azhar University .
Magic (paranormal).0394	Further , Egyptian folklorist Hasan El-Shamy , warns that scholars have often been uncritical in their application of the term sihr to both malevolent and benevolent forms of magic .
Magic (paranormal).0395	He argues that in Egypt , sihr only applies to sorcery .
Magic (paranormal).0396	A person who practices benevolent magic `` is not called saahir or sahhaar -LRB- sorcerer , witch -RRB- , but is normally referred to as shaikh -LRB- or shaikha for a female -RRB- , a title which is normally used to refer to a clergyman or a community notable or elder , and is equal to the English title : ` Reverend . ' ''
Magic (paranormal).0397	Varieties of magical practice The best-known type of magical practice is the spell , a ritualistic formula intended to bring about a specific effect .
Magic (paranormal).0398	Spells are often spoken or written or physically constructed using a particular set of ingredients .
Magic (paranormal).0399	The failure of a spell to work may be attributed to many causes , such as a failure to follow the exact formula , to the general circumstances being unconducive , to a lack of magical ability , to a lack of willpower or to fraud .
Magic (paranormal).0400	Another well-known magical practice is divination , which seeks to reveal information about the past , present or future .
Magic (paranormal).0401	Varieties of divination include : astrology , augury , cartomancy , chiromancy , dowsing , extispicy , fortune telling , geomancy , I Ching , omens , scrying , and tarot reading .
Magic (paranormal).0402	Necromancy is a practice which claims to involve the summoning of , and conversation with , spirits of the dead .
Magic (paranormal).0403	This is sometimes done simply to commune with deceased loved ones ; it can also be done to gain information from the spirits , as a type of divination ; or to command the aid of those spirits in accomplishing some goal , as part of casting a spell .
Magic (paranormal).0404	Varieties of magic can also be categorized by the techniques involved in their operation .
Magic (paranormal).0405	One common means of categorization distinguishes between contagious magic and sympathetic magic , one or both of which may be employed in any magical work .
Magic (paranormal).0406	Contagious magic involves the use of physical ingredients which were once in contact with the person or a thing which the practitioner intends to influence .
Magic (paranormal).0407	Sympathetic magic involves the use of images or physical objects which in some way resemble the person or thing that one hopes to influence ; voodoo dolls are an example .
Magic (paranormal).0408	This dichotomy was proposed by Sir James Frazer 's The Golden Bough .
Magic (paranormal).0409	Other common categories given to magic include High and Low Magic -LRB- the appeal to divine powers or spirits respectively , with goals lofty or personal , according to the type of magic -RRB- .
Magic (paranormal).0410	Another distinction is between `` manifest '' and `` subtle '' magic .
Magic (paranormal).0411	Subtle magic typically refers to magic of legend , gradually and sometimes intangibly altering the world , whereas manifest magic is magic that immediately appears as a result .
Magic (paranormal).0412	Academic historian Richard Kieckhefer divides the category of spells into psychological magic , which seeks to influence other people 's minds to do the magician 's will , such as with a love spell , or illusionary magic , which seeks to conjure the manifestation of various wonders .
Magic (paranormal).0413	A spell that conjures up a banquet , or that confers invisibility on the magician , would be examples of illusionary magic .
Magic (paranormal).0414	Magic that causes objective physical change , in the manner of a miracle , is not accommodated in Kieckhefer 's categories .
Magic (paranormal).0415	Magical traditions Another method of classifying magic is by `` traditions '' , which in this context typically refer to complexes or `` currents '' of magical belief and practice associated with various cultural groups and lineages of transmission .
Magic (paranormal).0416	Some of these traditions are highly specific and culturally circumscribed .
Magic (paranormal).0417	Others are more eclectic and syncretistic .
Magic (paranormal).0418	These traditions can compass both divination and spells .
Magic (paranormal).0419	When dealing with magic in terms of `` traditions '' , it is a common misconception for outsiders to treat any religion in which clergy members make amulets and talismans for their congregants as a `` tradition of magic '' , even though what is being named is actually an organized religion with clergy , laity , and an order of liturgical service .
Magic (paranormal).0420	This is most notably the case when Voodoo , Palo , Santería , Taoism , Wicca , and other contemporary religions and folk religions are mischaracterized as forms of `` magic '' , or even as `` sorcery . ''
Magic (paranormal).0421	Examples of magical , folk-magical , and religio-magical traditions include : * Alchemy * Animism * Asatru * Benedicaria * Black Magic * Bön * Candomblé Jejé * Ceremonial magic * Chaos magic * Druidry * Feri Tradition * Haitian Vodou * Hermetic Qabalah * Hermeticism * Hoodoo * Huna * Kabbalah * Louisiana Voodoo * Nagual * Obeah * Onmyōdō * Palo * Pow-wow * Psychonautics * Quimbanda * Reiki * Santería * Satanism * Seid * Setianism * Sex Magic * Shamanism * Shinto * Sigil Magic * Tantra * Taoism * Thelema * West African Vodun * Witchcraft * Wicca * Zos Kia Cultus
Walid Hicheri.0000	bytes = `` 2633 '' > Walid Hicheri -LRB- born 5 March 1986 in Aryanah -RRB- is Tunisian footballer .
Walid Hicheri.0001	He plays for Espérance Sportive de Tunis which playing in the top division league of Tunisia as Tunisian Ligue Professionnelle 1 as a defender .
Walid Hicheri.0002	Centre-back Walid Hicheri is one of the unsung heroes of the Esperance team and should feature strongly in the 2011 CAF Champions League .
Walid Hichri.0000	bytes = `` 2029 '' > Walid Hichri is a Tunisian footballer who plays as a centre back for Espérance Tunis .
